 

In this Chapter : 

Intent of the Chapter 

  Details of various Fire Protection 

Systems 

  Application of Fire Protection 

Systems 

  To provide protection for life and property from fire 

through Fire Protection Systems such as  Standpipes, 
Hydrants, Sprinkler systems and other types of fire 
suppression systems. 

  Design criteria for various hazards 

  To ensure properly designed Fire systems and adequate 

  Inspection and Maintenance of Fire 

Systems 

 

quantity of water is available for Fire Fighters. 

  To ensure Fire systems are designed, installed, 
Inspected and maintained as per international 
standards. 

1. Definitions 

 
1.1.  General 
 

1.1.1.  Shall  

 It is a mandatory requirement by Civil Defence. 
 

1.1.2.  Should 

 It is a recommendation by Civil Defence but it is not mandatory. 
 

1.1.3.  Listed 

Approved and registered by the individual Emirates’ Civil Defence material depart-
ment. 

 

1.1.4.  Bar (bar) 

Unit of measurement for pressure. Though it is not a SI unit, it is a common practice 
to use this unit of measurement in fire protection. 
1 Bar = 14.5 psi. 
1 psi = 0.0689 bar. 

 
1.1.5.  US Gallons (Gal.) 

Unit of measurement for volume. Though it is not a SI unit, it is a common practice 
to use this unit of measurement for water volume in fire protection. 
1 Gal. = 3.785 L (Liters) 
1 L = 0.264 Gal. 
1 Cubic Meter = 1000 L 
1 Cubic Meter = 264.17 Gal. 

       
1.1.6.  GPM (Gallons per minute) 

Unit of measurement for flow. Though it is not a SI unit, it is widely a practice to use 
this unit of measurement for water flow per square feet in fire protection. 
1 GPM (gpm/minute) = 3.78 Liter/minute  (LPM) 
 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 525 of 1348 

1.1.  General 
 

1.1.7.   Breeching inlet 
 

A connection through which the Civil Defence fire department can pump supple-
mental water into the sprinkler system, standpipe, or other system, furnishing wa-
ter for fire extinguishment or to supplement existing water supplies. 

 
1.1.8.  Fire Vehicle (Fire Fighting Apparatus)  
 

Fire Vehicle or Fire Fighting Apparatus is designed for fire fighters and is used by 
Civil Defence trained fire fighters to carry water and equipment to fight fires. The-
se Vehicles are equipped with Water, pumps, extinguishing agents, extinguishers, 
Rescue and smoke venting tools and equipment. Please see Chapter 2, section 4. 

 

1.1.9.  Fire Suppression  
 

Sharply reducing the heat release rate of a fire and preventing its regrowth by 
means of direct and sufficient application of extinguishing agents such as water or 
gas or chemicals through the fire plume to the burning fuel surface. 

1.1.10.  Water based Fire Protection Systems  
 

Water is the most widely used and available fire-extinguishing agent. Water is 
effective in fire suppression. The techniques and mechanisms using water and its 
heat absorbing, cooling and fire extinguishing properties to fight and extinguish 
fires are Water Based Fire Protection Systems such as Standpipe System, Auto-
matic Sprinkler Systems, Water Spray Systems, Water Mist Systems, Fire Hydrant 
Systems, and Foam Systems etc. 

1.1.11.  Gas and Chemical based Fire Suppression Systems  
 

Gas extinguishing technology is based mainly on the principle of removing oxygen. 
By introducing a gaseous extinguishing agent into the room's atmosphere the oxy-
gen content is reduced to the point where the combustion process is halted. The 
gas extinguishing process uses either inert or chemical gases. This technique and 
mechanism using various gases and chemicals such as Clean Agents, CO2, Dry 
Chemical and Wet Chemical agents and their fire extinguishing properties to fight 
and extinguish fires are called Gas and Chemical based Fire Protection Systems. 

1.1.12.  High-Challenge Fire Hazard 
 

A fire hazard typical of that produced by fires in combustible high-piled storage. 

1.1.13.  Hazard Classification for Sprinkler Protection  
 

1.1.13.1. Light Hazard 

The areas and occupancies which and contain low quantity and low com-
bustible materials which are expected to release low heat release rates 
during fire condition shall be classified as light hazard occupancies. Occu-
pancies considered as light hazard may include 
 
a.  Assembly, Group C  
(Art galleries, Community halls, Mosques, Churches, Temples, Court-
rooms, Funeral parlors, Gymnasiums, Fitness Centers, Seminar halls, Li-
braries, Museums, Open air Theaters, Amphitheaters, Parks, Beaches) 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 526 of 1348 

 

b. Assembly, Group B  
(Amusement  Parks, Grandstands, Stadiums, Bleachers, Swimming Pools, 
Skating Rinks, Indoor Kid’s Play Areas, Bowling alleys, Pool/billiard par-
lors, Waiting areas in transportation terminals, Airport Terminal Build-
ings, Restaurant seating areas, Food courts seating areas) 
 
c. Educational, Group A  
(Nurseries, Kindergartens, Preschool center, Talent Grooming centers for 
kids) 
 
d. Educational, Group B  
(Schools for up to 12th grade students) 
 
e. Educational, Group C  
(Colleges, Universities, Training centers for adults) 
 
f. Healthcare, Group B  
(Clinics) 
 
g. Healthcare, Group C  
(Ambulatory healthcare centers) 
 
h. Residential, Group A  
(Residential buildings, Apartments, assisted Living homes) 
 
i. Residential, Group B  
(Staff accommodation, Hostels, Monasteries, School boarding house) 
 
j. Residential, Group C  
(Labor accommodation) 
 
k. Daycare, Group A  
(Child day care, old age day care) 
 
l. Daycare, Group B  
(Adult day care) 
 
m. Detention and Correctional, Group A  
(Adult Prisons, Adult Detention centers, Adult Jails, Adult Correctional 
centers, Adult Pre-release centers) 
 
n. Detention and Correctional, Group B  
(Juvenile Prisons, Juvenile Detention centers, Juvenile Correctional cen-
ters) 
 
o. Detention and Correctional, Group C  
(Medical quarantines, Airport quarantines) 
 
p. Industrial, Group C  
(Beverages (non-alcoholic), Brick and masonry, Gypsum, Ice , Metal 
products (fabrication and assembly), Telecommunications signal pro-
cessing, Telephone exchanges, GSM Switching Stations) 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 527 of 1348 

 

q. Animal Housing, Group A  
(Animal Market, Pet Shops, Bird Market, Veterinary Clinic) 
 
r. Animal Housing, Group C  
(Zoo) 

 
 
1.1.13.2. Ordinary Hazard, Group 1 

The areas and occupancies which contains medium quantity and moder-
ate combustible materials and the storages up to 2.4 meters which are 
expected to release moderate heat release rates during fire condition 
shall be classified as Ordinary Hazard group-1. Occupancies considered 
as ordinary hazard are: 
 
a. Assembly, Group A  
(Banquet halls, Night clubs, Discos, Restaurants  with more than 50 peo-
ple, Pubs, Bars, Theaters, Concert Halls, Cinemas, Indoor Stadiums, Stu-
dios with audience, Exhibition halls, Casinos) 
 
b. Hotel, Group A  
(Hotels, Hotel apartments, time share properties) 
 
c. Hotel, Group B  
(Dormitories, Motels, Lodging) 
 
d. Hotel, Group C  
(Resorts) 
 
e. Mercantile, Group A  
(Hardware Stores, Paint Stores, Chemical Stores, Furniture Stores, Motor 
Vehicle Showrooms, Restaurants) 
 
f. Mercantile, Group B  
(Department Stores, Supermarkets, Hypermarkets, Shopping Centers, 
Anchor stores, Showrooms, Retail stores, Whole sale stores, Boutiques, 
Drugstores, Gift Shops) 
 
g. Storage, Group C  
(Frozen Food, Asbestos, Glass or ceramic, Cement in bags, Chalk and 
crayons, Dairy products in nonwaxed coated paper containers, Dry cell 
batteries, Electrical coils, Electrical motors, Empty cans, Foods in non-
combustible containers, Fresh fruits and vegetables in nonplastic trays or 
containers, Frozen foods, Glass bottles, empty or filled with noncombus-
tible liquids, Gypsum board, Inert pigments, Ivory, Meats, Metal cabi-
nets, Metal desks with plastic tops and trim Metal parts, Metals, Mirrors, 
Oil-filled and other types of distribution transformers, Parking garages, 
open or enclosed, Porcelain and pottery, Stoves, Talc and soapstones, 
Washers and dryer) 
 
 
 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 528 of 1348h. Industrial, Group B  
(Appliances, Athletic equipment, Automobiles, Bakeries, Beverages 
(alcoholic), Bicycles, Boat building, Brooms or brushes, Business ma-
chines, Cameras and photo equipment, Cold Storage, Canvas or similar 
fabric, Carpets and rugs, Clothing, Construction, Disinfectants, Dry-
cleaning /dyeing, Electric light plants and power houses, Substations, 
Electronics, Engines, Food processing,) 
 

1.1.13.3. Ordinary Hazard, Group 2 

The areas and occupancies which are used for commercial & industrial 
uses and contain medium quantity and moderate to high combustible 
materials and the storages up to 3.6 meters which are expected to re-
lease moderate heat release rates and the storages up to 2.4 meters 
which are high heat release rates during fire condition shall be classified 
as Ordinary Hazard group-2, such as 
 
a. Animal Housing, Group B  
(Stable, Animal sheds, Livestock Shelter, Slaughter Houses) 
 
b. Malls, Group A 
(Covered Malls) 
 
c. Industrial, Group B 
(Paper and pulp mill, Paper process plants, Piers and wharves, Plastics 
fabrication, including blow molding, extruding, and machining; excluding 
operations using combustible, hydraulic fluids, Post offices, Printing and 
publishing, Racetrack stable/kennel areas, including those stable/kennel 
areas, barns, and associated buildings at state, county, and local fair-
grounds, Repair garages, Resin application area, Stages, Textile manufac-
turing, Tire manufacturing, Tobacco products manufacturing, Wood ma-
chining, Wood product assembly).  
 

1.1.13.4. Extra Hazard, Group 1 

The areas and occupancies which are used for industrial uses and con-
tains high quantity and very high combustible materials which will sup-
port fast development of fire and are expected to release very high heat 
release rates during fire condition and having less or no combustible or 
flammable liquids & gases shall be classified as Extra high hazard     
group 1. Occupancies with high hazard, Group 1 are: 
 
a. Storage/Industrial, Group B  
(Storage and activities involving Aircraft hangar, Bags: cloth/burlap/
paper, Bamboos and rattan, Baskets, Belting: canvas/leather, Books and 
paper in rolls or packs, Boots and shoes, Buttons, Cardboard , its boxes, 
Clothing, woolen wearing apparel, Cordage, Dry boat storage (indoor), 
Furniture, Furs, Glues, mucilage, pastes, Grains, Horns and combs, other 
than celluloid, Leather, Linoleum, Lumber, Motor vehicle repair garages, 
Photo engravings, Resilient flooring, Silks, Soaps, Sugar, Tobacco, cigars, 
cigarettes and snuff etc.  

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 529 of 1348 

1.1.  General 

Upholstery and mattresses, Wax candles, Combustible hydraulic fluid 
use areas, Die casting, Metal extruding, Plywood and particleboard man-
ufacturing, Printing *using inks having flash points below 100°F, (38°C)+, 
Rubber reclaiming, compounding, drying, milling, vulcanizing, Saw mills, 
Textile picking, opening, blending, garnetting, or carding, combining of 
cotton, synthetics, wool shoddy, or burlap Upholstering with plastic 
foams) 
 

1.1.13.5. Extra Hazard, Group 2 

The areas and occupancies which are used for industrial uses and con-
tain moderate to high quantity of flammable & combustible liquids and 
gases which will support rapid growth of fire and expected to release 
very high heat release rates during fire condition shall be classified as 
Extra High Hazard group 2.    
 
a. Storage/Industrial, Group A 
(Storage and activities involving Explosives, Detonators, Pyrophoric ma-
terial, Unstable (Reactive) material, Organic Peroxide, Oxidizer, Fire 
Works, Aerosols Level 1,2,3, Combustible Liquid Class I, II, III, Combus-
tible Fiber, Combustible Dust, Pyrotechnic Material, Cryogenics, Flamma-
ble, Oxidizing, Flammable Gas, Flammable Liquid, IA, IB, IC, Flammable 
Solid, Oxidizing Gas, Water Reactive Material, Perfumes, Baled Cotton, 
Corrosive Material, Toxic Material, Plastic products, Tires, Asphalt satu-
rating, Flammable liquids spraying, Flow coating, Manufactured home or 
modular building assemblies, where finished enclosure is present and 
has combustible interiors), Open oil quenching, Plastics manufacturing, 
Solvent cleaning, Varnish and paint dipping etc.) 
 
b. Parking, Group B 
(Robotic, Mechanical parking) 
 

1.1.13.6. Commodity Class –I 

Class I commodity are the noncombustible materials that are                                 
a. stored directly on wooden pallets                                                                                 
b.  single layer corrugated cartons with or with out pallets                                        
c.  Or shrink wrapped or paper wrapped as unit load with or without pal-
lets. See Table 9.2. 
 

1.1.13.7. Commodity Class-II 

Class II commodity are the noncombustible materials that are stored in 
slatted wooden crates, solid wood boxes, multiple-layered corrugated 
cartons, or other similar combustible packaging material, with or with-
out pallets. See Table 9.2. 
 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 530 of 1348 

1.1.13.8. Commodity Class-III  

Class III commodity are the materials manufactured from wood, paper, 
natural fibers or Group C plastics with or without cartons, boxes or 
crates and with or without pallets. The materials that contain 5% by vol-
ume or by weight of group C plastics products may also be considered as 
class 3 commodities. See Table 9.2. 

 
1.1.  General 
 

1.1.13.9. Commodity Class-IV 

Class IV commodity are the materials manufactured from group B plas-
tics-tics or from free flowing group A plastics or contain within itself or 
its packing 5 – 15 % by weight or by volume of group A plastics. See Ta-
ble 9.2. 
 

1.1.13.10. Group –A Plastics  

Examples of Group A plastic materials are ABS (acrylonitrile-butadiene-
styrene copolymer), Acetyl (polyformaldehyde), Acrylic (polymethyl 
methacrylate), Butyl rubber, EPDM (ethylene-propylene rubber), FRP 
(fiberglass-reinforced polyester), Natural rubber (if expanded), Nitrile-
rubber (acrylonitrile-butadiene-rubber), PET (thermoplastic polyester), 
Polybutadiene, Polycarbonate, Polyester elastomer, Polyethylene, Poly-
propylene, Polystyrene, Polyurethane, PVC (polyvinyl chloride — highly 
plasticized, with plasticizer content greater than 20 percent) (rarely 
found), SAN (styrene acrylonitrile) and SBR (styrene-butadiene rubber). 
See Table 9.2. 
 

1.1.13.11. Group –B Plastics 

Examples of Group B plastic materials are Cellulosics (cellulose acetate, 
cellulose acetate butyrate, ethyl cellulose), Chloroprene rubber, Fluoro-
plastics (ECTFE — ethylene-chlorotrifluoro-ethylene copolymer; ETFE — 
ethylene-tetrafluoroethylene-copolymer; FEP — fluorinated ethylene-
propylene copolymer), Natural rubber (not expanded), Nylon (nylon 6, 
nylon 6/6) and Silicone rubber. 

 

1.1.13.12. Group –C Plastics 

Examples of Group C plastic materials are Fluoroplastics (PCTFE — poly-
chlorotrifluoroethylene; PTFE — polytetrafluoroethylene), Melamine 
(melamine formaldehyde), Phenolic, PVC (polyvinyl chloride — flexible 
— PVCs with plasticizer content up to 20 percent), PVDC (polyvinylidene 
chloride), PVDF (polyvinylidene fluoride), PVF (polyvinyl fluoride) and 
Urea (urea formaldehyde). 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 531 of 1348 

1.1.  General 
 

1.1.13.13. Rolled paper Store 

A rolled paper storage facility can be further subdivided in to four clas-
ses based on its weight to determine the sprinkler system design crite-
ria. 
 
1.1.13.13.1. Heavy weight Class  

Heavyweight class shall include paperboard and paper 
stock having a basis weight per 92.9 m² of 9.1 kg. 

 

1.1.13.13.2. Medium weight Class 

Medium weight class shall include all the broad range of 
papers having a basis weight per 92.9 m2 of 4.5 kg to 9.1 
kg. 

 

1.1.13.13.3. Lightweight class 

Light weight class shall include all papers having a basis 
weight per 92.9 m² of 4.5 kg.   

 

1.1.13.13.4. Tissue  

Shall include the broad range of papers of characteristic 
gauzy texture, which, in some cases, are fairly transpar-
ent such as crepe wadding and the sanitary class includ-
ing facial tissue, paper napkins, bathroom tissue, and 
toweling. 
 

1.1.14.  Combustible Liquid 
 

A liquid that has a closed-cup flash point at or above 37.8°C (100°F). 

1.1.15.  Combustible Liquid Class II 
 

Any liquid that has a flash point at or above 37.8°C (100°F) and below 60°C (140°F). 

1.1.16.  Combustible Liquid Class III A 
 

Any liquid that has a flash point at or above 60°C (140°F), but below 93°C (200°F). 

1.1.17.  Combustible Liquid Class III B 
 

Any liquid that has a flash point at or above 93°C (200°F). 

1.1.18.  Flammable Liquid 
 

A liquid that has a closed-cup flash point that is below 37.8°C (100°F) and a maxi-
mum vapor pressure of 2068 mm Hg (40 psia) at 37.8°C (100°F). 

1.1.19.  Flammable Liquid Class I 
 

Any liquid that has a closed-cup flash point below 37.8°C (100°F). 

1.1.20.  Flammable Liquid Class I A 
 

Any liquid that has a flash point below 22.8°C (73°F) and a boiling point below 
37.8°C (100°F). 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 532 of 1348 

1.1.  General 

 
1.1.21.  Flammable Liquid Class I B 
 

Any liquid that has a flash point below 22.8°C (73°F) and a boiling point at or above 
37.8°C (100°F). 

1.1.22.  Flammable Liquid Class I C 
 

Any liquid that has a flash point at or above 22.8°C (73°F) but below 37.8°C (100°F). 

1.1.23.  Light or Low Hazard Storage Material List 
 

The Light or Low hazard materials for sprinkler protection criteria shall be as per 
Table 9.1.A. 

Table 9.1A.: Light / Low Hazard Material List 

CATEGORY 

LIST OF MATERIALS 

1.  FOOD AND    

BEVERAGE 

 
IN LESS THAN 5 
GAL. CAPACITY 
CONTAINERS 

2. METAL 

3. ELECTRICAL 

 

i.  Alcoholic beverages – up to 12% alcohol in metal, glass or ceramic material.  
ii.  Canned food – In cartons.  
iii.  Coffee – canned in carton.  
iv.  Fish products – frozen, non-waxed, non plastic packaging, canned, carton.  
v.  Frozen food – non-waxed, non-plastic packaging.  
vi.  Fruit – fresh, non-plastic trays or containers with wood spacers.  
vii.  Ice-cream.  
viii. Meat products – canned, carton, frozen, non-waxed, non-plastic containers.  
ix.  Milk and dairy products– waxed or non-waxed paper and plastic containers.  
x.  Nuts – canned, carton.  
xi.  Poultry product- canned, carton, frozen, non-waxed, non-plastic containers.  
xii.  Salt – bagged.  
xiii. Syrup – drummed metal containers.  

i.  Cans – empty metal.  
ii.  File cabinets – metal, wrap by cardboard.  
iii.  Metal desk – with plastic tops and trim.  
iv.  Metal doors and windows 
v.  Metal furniture 
vi.  Metal s., structural steel, cast iron 
vii.  Empty cargo containers 
viii. Precision dies 
ix.  Empty cylinders 
x.  Metal wires 
xi.  Scrap metal 

i.  Batteries – Dry cells, non-lithium, in cartons, filled automobile batteries.  
ii.  Electric coil  
iii.  Motor – electric  
iv.  Transformer (Non-energized) – dry   
v.  Wire – bare wire on metal spools, on wood skids.  
vi.  Computer 
vii.  Cookers, electric stoves 
viii. Water heaters 
ix.  Air condition, refrigeration spare parts 
x.  Antennas 
xi.  Telephone and telecommunication equipment  
xii.  Global positioning systems 
xiii. Type writers, photocopy machines 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 533 of 1348 

1.1.  General 

 
 

Table 9.1A.: Light / Low Hazard Material List 

CATEGORY 

LIST OF MATERIALS 

4. CONSTRUCTION 

5. AGRICULTURAL 

i.  Cement – in bags.  
ii.  Ready Mix concrete 
iii.  Paint – water based, carton.  
iv.  Cement blocks, Bricks and Masonry  
v.  Building hardware 
vi.  Tiles, Flooring 
vii.  Sand, Gravel and Stones 
viii. Sanitary ware 
ix.  Tanks and Silos 
x. 
xi.  Pipes and Fittings 
xii.  Scaffolding 
xiii. Marble  

Ironmongery 

i.  Seeds, Flowers, Plants 
ii.  Plant Nurseries 
iii.  Agricultural Tools, Equipment 
iv.  Garden Tools and Equipment 
v. 

Irrigation Tools and Equipment 

6. MISCELLANEOUS 

i.  Appliances like stove, refrigerator – not packaged, no exterior plastic materi-

al.  

ii.  Bottles, Jars – Empty glass, filled with noncombustible liquids or non-

combustible powders.  

iii.  Chalk and crayons.  
iv.  Fertilizers – Bagged, phosphates.  
v.  Glass and mirrors.  
vi.  Porcelain and pottery.  
vii.  Stables, Sheds  
viii. Washers and Driers  
ix.  Occupational Safety Equipment, hygiene. 
x.  Watches and clocks 
xi.  Laboratory equipment 
xii.  Medical equipment 
xiii. Solar energy equipment 
xiv. Diving equipment 
xv.  Loading, handling equipment 
xvi. Laundry equipment 
xvii.Industrial equipment and tools 
xviii.Jewelry trading 
xix. Pearls and precious stones 
xx.  Automobile spare parts 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 534 of 1348 

1.1.  General 

 
1.1.24.  Light or Low Hazard Industrial Activity List 
 

The Light or Low hazard activity list for sprinkler protection criteria shall be as per 
Table 9.1.B. 

 

Table 9.1.B: Light / Low Hazard Activity List 

CATEGORY 

LIST OF MATERIALS 

1. FOOD AND    

BEVERAGE 

i.  Non alcoholic beverage—bottling and production. 
ii. 

 Ice—Production 

2. METAL 

i.  Metal products (fabrication and assembly)  

3. ELECTRICAL 

4. CONSTRUCTION 

5. MISCELLANEOUS 

i.  Telecommunications signal processing  
ii.  GSM Switching stations 
iii.  Telephone exchanges  
iv.  Repair shops 
v.  Workshops without wood work, welding, cutting 

i.  Cement blocks, Bricks and Masonry—Production 
ii.  Ready mix concrete production 
iii.  Foundries  
iv.  Quarries  

i.  Ceramic, Porcelain and Pottery—Production 
ii.  Glass products—Production 
iii.  Mirror works 
iv.  Automobile workshops 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 535 of 1348 

1.1.25.  Identification of Classes of Materials (Commodity Classes) 
 

The identification of classes of materials for sprinkler design consideration shall be 
as per Table 9.2. (NFPA Table A.5.6.3.), in alphabetical order. 

Table 9.2: Classes of Materials/ Commodity 

PRODUCT           
CATEGORY 

PRODUCTS 

1. BATTERIES  

i.  Dry cells (excludes lithium, lithium-ion, and other simi-
lar exotic metals or combustible electrolyte); without 
blister packing (if blister packed refer to commodity 
classification definitions)  

ii.  Vehicle; any size (e.g., automobile or truck); Empty plas-

tic casing. 

iii.  Nonexpanded Vehicle; large (e.g., truck or larger); dry 
or wet (excludes lithium-ion and other cells containing 
combustible electrolyte) cells. 

iv.  Vehicle; small (e.g., automobile); wet (excludes lithium-
ion and other cells containing combustible electrolyte) 
cells 

COMMODITY 
CLASS 

Class I 
 
 
 
Group A  Nonexpanded 
 
Group A  Nonexpanded 
 
 
Class I 

2. EMPTY       

CONTAINERS  

i.  Noncombustible 
ii.  PET, bottles or jars   
iii.  Wood; solid sided (e.g., crates, boxes) 
iv.  Rigid plastic (not including PET), up to 32 oz. (1 L)  
 

Class I 
Class IV 
Class II 
Group A  Expanded 

3. FILM ROLLS,                          

i.  Film (polypropylene, polyester, polyethylene); rolled on 

PHOTO-
GRAPHIC 
ROLLS 

any reel type. 

ii.  Film; 35 mm metal film cartridges in polyethylene cans; 

cartoned. 

iii.  Film; motion picture or bulk rolls in polycarbonate, pol-
yethylene or in  metal cans; polyethylene bagged; car-
toned. 

iv.  Film; rolls in polycarbonate plastic cassettes; cartooned. 
v.  Photographic paper; sheets; bagged in polyethylene; 

cartoned 

Class II 
 
Class III 
 
Class II 
 
 
Class IV 
Class III 

4. FLAMMABLE /       

COMBUS-
TIBLE                
LIQUIDS 

 

i.  Aerosol; Level  
ii.  Lighters; butane; blister-packed; cartoned. 
iii.  Liquids; up to 20 percent alcohol (e.g., alcoholic bever-

ages, flavoring extracts); greater than 5 gallon (20 L) 
plastic containers with wall thickness greater than 1⁄4 in. 
(6 mm)  

iv.  Liquids; up to 20 percent alcohol (e.g., alcoholic bever-

ages, flavoring extracts); metal, glass or ceramic con-
tainers. 

v.  Liquids; up to 20 percent alcohol (e.g., alcoholic bever-
ages, flavoring extracts); wood, plastic containers great-
er than 5 gallons (20 L) and wall thickness up to 1⁄4 in. (6 
mm) 

vi.  Liquids; up to 20 percent alcohol (e.g., alcoholic bever-

ages, flavoring extracts); up to 5 gallons (20 L) plastic 
bottles or jars. 

Class III 
Group A  Nonexpanded 
Group A  Nonexpanded 
 
 
 
Class I 
 
 
Class II 
 
 
 
Class I 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 536 of 1348 

 
 

PRODUCT           
CATEGORY 

5. FOOD PRODUCTS 

—FROZEN   

Table 9.2: Classes of Materials/ Commodity 

PRODUCTS 

COMMODITY 
CLASS 

i.  Frozen foods; nonwaxed or nonplastic packaging. 
ii.  Frozen foods; plastic trays. 
iii.  Frozen foods; waxed or plastic-coated paper pack-

Class I 
Class III 
Class II 

aging 

6. FOOD PRODUCTS 
—NON FROZEN   

i.  Butter (stick or whipped spread) or margarine (up 

to 50 percent oil)  

ii.  Dry foods (such as baked goods, candy, cereals, 

cheese, chocolate, cocoa, coffee, grains, granular 
sugar, nuts, etc.); bagged or Cartoned  

iii.  Foods (e.g., coffee, fish products, fruit, meat prod-

ucts, nuts, poultry, etc.); metal cans  

iv.  Fruits and vegetables (noncombustible semi-

liquids); crushed; plastic containers up to 5 gallons 
(20 L)  

v.  Fruits and vegetables; fresh; wood spacers, non-

plastic trays or containers 

vi.  Margarine; over 50 and up to 80 percent oil  
vii.  Meat; fresh; no plastic packaging; uncartoned  
viii. Meat; fresh; no plastic packaging; cartoned  
ix.  Meat; fresh; plastic trays  
x.  Milk; any container; stored in solid plastic crates 
xi.  Milk; paper containers, or plastic bottles or jars up 

to 5 gallons (20 L) plastic bottles or jars.  

xii.  Salt; bagged 
xiii. Salt; cartoned  
xiv. Snack foods (e.g., potato chips); plasticized alumi-

num bags; cartoned  

xv. Syrup; wooden container  

7. FURNITURE AND 

BEDDING 

i.  Furniture and bedding; with foam cushioning  
ii.  Furniture; metal (e.g., file cabinets or desks with 

plastic trim); cartoned  

iii.  Furniture; wood (e.g., doors, windows, cabinets, 

etc.); no plastic coverings or foam cushioning  

iv.  Furniture; wood; plastic coverings nonexpanded 

plastic trim  

v.  Box spring; standard (minimal plastic materials)  
vi.  Box spring; wrapped in plastic cover  
vii. Mattress; foam (in finished form)  

Class III 
 
Class III 
 
 
Class I 
 
Class I 
 
 
Class I 
 
Group A  Nonexpanded 
Class I 
Class II 
Class III 
Group A  Nonexpanded 
Class I 
 
Class I 
Class II 
Group A Nonexpanded 
 
Class II 

Group A Expanded 
Class I 
 
Class III 
 
Class IV 
 
Class III 
Class IV 
Group A Expanded 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 537 of 1348 

 
 

Table 9.2: Classes of Materials/ Commodity 

PRODUCT           
CATEGORY 

PRODUCTS 

8. HOUSING       
MATERIALS/  
APPLIANCES 

i.  Appliances; major (e.g., stoves, refrigerators); no 

appreciable plastic interior or exterior trim; car-
tooned. 

ii.  Appliances; major (e.g., stoves, refrigerators); no 
appreciable plastic interior or exterior trim; uncar-
toned Appliances; no appreciable plastic exterior 
trim (interior of unit can have appreciable plastic). 

iii.  Carpet tiles; cartoned  
iv.  Fiberglass insulation; paper-backed rolls; bagged or 

unbagged  

v.  Floor coverings; vinyl, stacked tiles 
vi.  Floor coverings; vinyl; rolled  
vii.  Gypsum board  
viii. Housing materials (such as sinks, countertops, etc.); 

noncombustible, cartoned or crated  

ix.  Paint; oil-based; friction-top metal containers; car-

tooned  

x.  Paint; water-based (latex); friction-top metal con-

tainers; cartoned  

xi.  Roofing shingles; asphalt-coated fiberglass  
xii. Roofing shingles; asphalt-impregnated felt  

9. MISCELLANEOUS 

i.  Ammunition; small arms and shotgun; cartoned  
ii.  Charcoal; mineral spirit impregnated; bagged  
iii.  Charcoal; standard (non-mineral spirit impregnated); 

bagged  

iv.  Leather hides; baled Class II Leather; finished prod-

ucts (e.g., shoes, jackets, gloves, bags, luggage, belts)  

v.  Motors; electric  
vi.  Shock absorbers; metal dust cover  
vii.  Shock absorbers; plastic dust cover  
viii. Skis; composite materials (plastic, fiberglass, foam, 

etc.)  

ix.  Tobacco products; cartoned  
x.  Toys; stuffed; foam or synthetic  
xi.  Transformer; dry or empty (i.e., void of oil)-filled  
xii. Automobile spare parts, Automobile workshop 

COMMODITY 
CLASS 

Class II 
 
 
Class III 
 
 
 
Group A Nonexpanded 
Class IV 
 
Class IV 
Group A Nonexpanded 
Class I 
Class II 
 
Class IV 
 
Class I 
 
Class III 
Class IV 

Class IV 
Group A Expanded  
Class III 
 
Class III 
 
Class I 
Class II 
Class III 
Class IV 
 
Class III 
Group A Expanded  
Class I 
Class II 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 538 of 1348 

 
 

PRODUCT           
CATEGORY 

10. NONCOMBUS-
TIBLE   LIQUIDS  

Table 9.2: Classes of Materials/ Commodity 

PRODUCTS 

i.  Liquids or semi-liquids; PET containers greater than 

5 gallons (20 L) having a nominal wall thickness 
greater than 0.25 in (6 mm) 

ii.  Liquids or semi-liquids; PET containers up to 5 gal-
lons (20 L) or greater than 5 gallons (20 L) having a 
nominal wall thickness up to 0.25 in (6 mm)  

iii.  Liquids or semi-liquids (e.g., crushed fruits and veg-
etables); plastic containers up to 5 gallons (18.9 L) 
Capacity. 

iv.  Liquids or semi-liquids; plastic (except PET) contain-

ers greater than 5 gallons (20 L) capacity having a 
nominal wall thickness greater than 0.25 in. (6 mm)  
v.  Liquids or semi-liquids; plastic (except PET) contain-

ers greater than 5 gallons (20 L) capacity having a 
nominal wall thickness up to 0.25 in. (6 mm) 

vi.  Liquids; cardboard drink boxes, plastic-coated, wax-
coated, and/or aluminum-lined; uncartoned or on 
corrugated carton trays with plastic sheeting. 

vii.  Liquids; cardboard drink boxes, plastic-coated, wax-

coated, and/or aluminum-lined; stored in plastic 
containers  

viii. Liquids; glass bottles or jars; cartoned  
ix.  Liquids; pharmaceuticals (nonflammable); glass 

bottles or jars; cartoned. 

x.  Liquids; plastic bottles or jars; stored in open or sol-

id plastic crates  

11. PAPER        
PRODUCTS 

i.  Paper Products Book signatures (paper part of book 

without hard cover)  

ii.  Cartons (i.e., cardboard flats); corrugated; partially 

assembled. 

iii.  Cartons (i.e., cardboard flats); corrugated; unassem-

bled in neat piles. 

iv.  Cartons; wax-coated, single-walled corrugated  
v.  Cellulosic paper products; nonwax-coated (e.g., 

books, cardboard games, cartoned tissue products, 
magazines, newspapers, paper cups, paper plates, 
paper towels, plastic-coated paper food containers, 
stationery)  

vi.  Cellulosic paper products; wax-coated (e.g., paper 

plates, cups); loosely packed; cartoned. 

vii.  Cellulosic paper products; wax-coated (e.g., paper 

plates, cups); nested; cartoned  
viii. Matches; paper-type; cartoned  
ix.  Matches; wooden; cartoned  
x.  Rolled; lightweight; in storage racks  
xi.  Rolled; medium or heavyweight; in storage racks or 

on-side  

xii.  Tissue products; plastic-wrapped; cartoned  
xiii. Tissue products; plastic-wrapped; uncartoned  

 

COMMODITY 
CLASS 

Class IV  
 
 
Class  I 
 
 
Class I 
 
 
Group A Nonexpanded 
 
 
Class II 
 
 
Class I 
 
 
Group A Nonexpanded 
 
 
Class I 
Class II 
 
Group A Nonexpanded 

Class II 
 
Class IV 
 
Class III 
 
Group A Nonexpanded 
Class III 
 
 
 
 
Group A Nonexpanded 
 
Class IV 
 
Class IV 
Group A Nonexpanded 
Class IV 
Class III 
 
Class III 
Group A Nonexpanded 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 539 of 1348 

 
 

Table 9.2: Classes of Materials/ Commodity 

PRODUCT           
CATEGORY 

PRODUCTS 

12. PLASTIC /      

RUBBER 

 

i.  ABS (Acrylonitrile-butadienestyrene copolymer)  
ii.  Acetyl (polyformaldehyde)  
iii.  Acrylic (polymethyl methacrylate)  
iv.  Automobile bumpers and dashboards  
v.  Butyl rubber Cellulose Acetate Class IV 
vi.  Cellulose Acetate Butyrate  
vii.  Chloroprene rubber  
viii. Containers; nonexpanded plastic gridded or solid; col-

lapsed or nested with no air spaces  

ix.  ECTFE (ethylene-chlorotrifluoroethylene copolymer)  
x.  EPDM (ethylene-propylene rubber)  
xi.  ETFE (ethylene-tetrafluoroethylene copolymer)  
xii.  Ethyl Cellulose   
xiii. FEP (fluorinated ethylene-propylene copolymer)  
xiv. FRP (fiberglass-reinforced polyester)  
xv.  Melamine (melamine formaldehyde)  
xvi. Nitrile Rubber (acrylonitrile-butadiene rubber)  
xvii.Nylon (nylon 6, nylon 6/6)  
xviii.PCTFE (polychlorotrifluoroethylene)  
xix. PET (Polyethylene Terephthalate —thermoplastic polyes-

ter)  

xx.  Phenolic  
xxi. Plastics; stored in fully closed and solid (no openings), 

metal containers  
xxii.  Polybutadiene  
xxiii.  Polycarbonate  
xxiv.  Polyester elastomer  
xxv.  Polyethylene  
xxvi.  Polypropylene  
xxvii.  Polystyrene; foam products (plates, cups, etc.)  
xxviii. Polystyrene; rigid products   
xxix.  Polyurethane   
xxx.  PTFE (polytetrafluoroethylene)  
xxxi.  PVC (polyvinyl chloride) products, up to 20% plasticizer  
xxxii.  PVC (polyvinyl chloride) products, greater than 20% 

plasticizer  

xxxiii. PVC resins; bagged  
xxxiv. PVDC (polyvinylidene chloride)  
xxxv.  PVDF (polyvinylidene fluoride)  
xxxvi. PVF (polyvinyl fluoride)  
xxxvii.Rubber; natural in blocks; cartoned  
xxxviii.Rubber; natural; expanded  
xxxix. Rubber; natural; nonexpanded  
Rubber; synthetic (santoprene)  
xl. 
xli. 
SAN (styrene acrylonitrile)  
xlii.  SBR (styrene-butadiene rubber)  
xliii.  Silicone rubber Class IV 
xliv.  Urea (urea formaldehyde)  

COMMODITY 
CLASS 

Group A Non-expanded 
Group A Non-expanded 
Group A Non-expanded 
Group A Non-expanded 
Class IV 
Group A Non-expanded 
Class IV 
Group A Non-expanded 
 
Class IV 
Group A Non-expanded 
Class IV 
Group A Non-expanded 
Class IV 
Group A Non-expanded 
Class III 
Group A Non-expanded 
Group A Non-expanded 
Class III 
Group A Non-expanded 
 
Class III 
Class I 
 
Group A Non-expanded 
Group A Non-expanded 
Group A Non-expanded 
Group A Non-expanded 
Group A Non-expanded 
Group A Expanded 
Group A Non-expanded 
Group A Expanded 
Class III 
Class III 
Group A Nonexpanded 
 
Class III 
Class III 
Class III 
Group A Non-expanded 
Group A Non-expanded 
Group A Expanded 
Group A Non-expanded 
Group A Non-expanded 
Group A Non-expanded 
Group A Non-expanded 
Class IV 
Class III 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 540 of 1348 

 
 

Table 9.2: Classes of Materials/ Commodity 

PRODUCT           
CATEGORY 

PRODUCTS 

13. PLASTIC        
CONTAINERS 

i.  Plastic Containers Bottles or jars (except PET) greater 
than 1 gallon (4 L) containing noncombustible solids  

ii.  Bottles or jars (except PET) up to 1 gallon (4 L) contain-

ing noncombustible solids  

i.  Pharmaceutical pills; glass bottles or jars; cartoned  
ii.  Pharmaceuticals pills; plastic bottles or jars; cartoned  
iii.  Polyvinyl Alcohol (PVA) resins; bagged  
iv.  Powders; combustible (ordinary such as sugar or flour); 

free-flowing; bagged  

v.  Powders; noncombustible free-flowing powdered or 

granular materials (cement, calcium chloride, clay, iron 
oxide, sodium chloride, sodium silicate, etc.)  

vi.  Powders; noncombustible; glass bottles or jars; car-

tooned  

vii.  Powders; noncombustible; PET bottles or jars  
viii. Powders; noncombustible; plastic (other than PET) 

bottles or jars; uncartoned  

ix.  Powders; noncombustible; plastic bottles or jars greater 

than 1 gallon (4 L) capacity  

x.  Powders; noncombustible; plastic bottles or jars up to 1 

gallon (4 L) capacity; cartooned  

i.  Cloth; natural fibers; baled  
ii.  Cloth; synthetic cloth Class IV 
iii.  Clothing; natural fibers (e.g., wool, cotton) and viscose 
iv.  Cotton; cartoned  
v.  Diapers; cotton or linen 
vi.  Diapers; plastic or nonwoven fabric; cartoned Class IV 
vii.  Diapers; plastic or nonwoven fabric; plastic-wrapped; 

uncartoned  

viii. Fabric; rayon and nylon  
ix.  Fabric; synthetic (except rayon and nylon); greater than 

50/50 blend  

x.  Fabric; synthetic (except rayon and nylon); up to 50/50 

blend  

xi.  Fabric; vinyl-coated (e.g., tablecloth);  
xii.  Fibers; rayon and nylon; baled  
xiii. Fibers; synthetic (except rayon and nylon); baled  
xiv. Thread or yarn; rayon and nylon; wood or paper spools  
xv.  Thread or yarn; rayon or nylon; plastic spools  
xvi. Thread or yarn; synthetic (except rayon and nylon); 

greater than 50/50 blend; paper or wood spools  

xvii.Thread or yarn; synthetic (except rayon and nylon); 

greater than 50/50 blend; plastic spools   

xviii.Thread or yarn; synthetic (except rayon and nylon); up 

to 50/50 blend; plastic spools  

xix. Thread or yarn; synthetic (except rayon and nylon); up 

to 50/50 blend; wood or paper spools  

14. POWDERS/ 

PILLS 

15. TEXTILE   

MATERIALS 

 

COMMODITY 
CLASS 

Group A Non-expanded 
 
Group A Non-expanded 
 

Class II 
Class IV 
Class IV 
Class II 
 
Class I 
 
 
Class I 
 
Class II 
Group A Non-expanded 
 
Group A Non-expanded 
 
Class IV 

Class III 
Class IV 
Class III 
Class III 
Class III 
Class IV 
Group A Non-expanded 
 
Class IV 
Group A Non-expanded 
 
Class III 
 
Group A Nonexpanded 
Class IV 
Group A Nonexpanded 
Class IV 
Group A Nonexpanded 
Class IV 
 
Group A Nonexpanded 
 
Group A Nonexpanded 
 
Class III 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 541 of 1348 

Table 9.2: Classes of Materials/ Commodity 

PRODUCT           
CATEGORY 

PRODUCTS 

COMMODITY 
CLASS 

16. WAX 

17. WIRE/  
CABLE/ 
SPOOLS 

i.  Candles Group A Expanded 
ii.  Paraffin or petroleum wax; blocks Group A Expanded 

Group A Expanded 
Group A Expanded 

i.  Spools; plastic; empty  
ii.  Spools; wood; empty  
iii.  Wire or cable; PVC insulated; metal or wood spools  
iv.  Wire or cable; PVC insulated; plastic spools  
v.  Wire; bare; metal spools, uncartoned  
vi.  Wire; bare; metal spools; cartoned  
vii.  Wire; bare; plastic spools; cartoned  
viii. Wire; bare; plastic spools; uncartoned  
ix.  Wire; bare; wood or cardboard spools  

Group A Nonexpanded 
Class III 
Class II 
Class IV 
Class I 
Class II 
Class IV 
Group A Nonexpanded 
Class II 

18. WOOD 

PRODUCTS 

i.  Wood patterns  
ii.  Wood products (e.g., fiberboard, lumber, particle board, 
plywood, pressboard with smooth ends and edges); bun-
dled solid blocks 

iii.  Wood products (e.g., fiberboard, lumber, particle board, 

plywood, pressboard with smooth ends and edges); un-
bundled or non-solid blocks  

iv.  Wood products (e.g., toothpicks, clothespins and hangers 

Class IV 
Class II 
 
 
Class III 
 
 
Class III 

 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 542 of 1348An assembled unit consisting of a fire pump, driver, controller, and accessories. 

A pump that is a provider of liquid flow and pressure dedicated to fire protection. 

 

1.2.  Fire Pumps 
 

1.2.1.  Fire Pump Unit 
 
 
1.2.2.  Fire Pump 
 
 
1.2.3.  Fire Pump Controller 
 

A group of devices that serve to govern, in some predetermined manner, the 
starting and stopping of the fire pump driver and to monitor and signal the status 
and condition of the fire pump unit. 

A pump with the shaft normally in a horizontal position. 

 
1.2.4.  Horizontal Pump 
 
 
1.2.5.  Horizontal Split-Case Pump 
 
 
1.2.6.  Vertical Lineshaft Turbine Pump 
 

A centrifugal pump characterized by a housing that is split parallel to the shaft. 

A vertical shaft centrifugal pump with rotating impeller or impellers and with dis-
charge from the pumping element coaxial with the shaft. The pumping element is 
suspended by the conductor system, which encloses a system of vertical shafting 
used to transmit power to the impellers, the prime mover being external to the 
flow stream. 

 
1.2.7.  Total Head, Horizontal Pumps 
 

The measure of the work increase, per kilogram (pound) of liquid, imparted to the 
liquid by the pump, and therefore the algebraic difference between the total dis-
charge head and the total suction head. Total head, as determined on test where 
suction lift exists, is the sum of the total discharge head and total suction lift.  

 
1.2.8.  Total Head, Vertical Turbine Pumps 
 

The distance from the pumping water level to the center of the discharge gauge 
plus the total discharge head. 

 
1.2.9.  Total Discharge Head 
 

The reading of a pressure gauge at the discharge of the pump, converted to meters 
(feet) of liquid, and referred to datum, plus the velocity head at the point of gauge 
attachment. 

 
1.2.10.  Total Rated Head 
 

The total head developed at rated capacity and rated speed for either a horizontal 
split-case or a vertical shaft turbine–type pump. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 543 of 1348 

1.2.  Fire Pumps 
 

1.2.11.  Total Suction Head 
 

Suction head exists where the total suction head is above atmospheric pressure. 
Total suction head, as determined on test, is the reading of a gauge at the suction 
of the pump, converted to meters (feet) of liquid, and referred to datum, plus the 
velocity head at the point of gauge attachment. 

 
1.2.12.  Centrifugal Pump 
 

A pump in which the pressure is developed principally by the action of centrifugal 
force. 

 
1.2.13.  End Suction Pump 
 

A single suction pump having its suction nozzle on the opposite side of the casing 
from the stuffing box and having the face of the suction nozzle perpendicular to 
the longitudinal axis of the shaft. 

 
1.2.14.  Automatic Transfer Switch 
 

Self-acting equipment for transferring one or more load conductor connections 
from one power source to another. 

 
1.2.15.  Diesel Engine 
 

An internal combustion engine in which the fuel is ignited entirely by the heat re-
sulting from the compression of the air supplied for combustion. The oil-diesel en-
gine, which operates on fuel oil injected after compression is practically complet-
ed, is the type usually used as a fire pump driver. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 544 of 1348 

1.3.  Fire Hose Systems 
 

1.3.1.  Fire Hose Cabinet (FHC) 
 

A cabinet housing combination of instantaneous connection outlets for Landing 
Valve, Hose reel along with, nozzle and fire extinguishers. 

 
1.3.2.  Landing Valve 
 

A 65 mm diameter instantaneous water outlet normally located near the staircase 
for trained or Civil Defence fire fighters to use during fire. 

 
1.3.3.  Hose Reel or Hose Rack  
 

A 25 mm Hose reel or 40 mm diameter Hose rack, instantaneous water outlet with 
a connected hose for trained occupants or Civil Defence fire fighters to use during 
fire. 

1.3.4.  Standpipe 
 

The vertical portion of the system piping that delivers the water supply for hose 
connections (and sprinklers on combined systems), vertically from floor to floor. 
The term standpipe can also refer to the horizontal portion of the system piping 
that delivers the water supply for two or more hose connections (and sprinklers on 
combined systems) on a single level. 

 
1.3.5.  Combined System 
 

A piping system that feeds both Landing valves, Hose systems and Sprinkler system 
network. 

 
1.3.6.  Dry Riser System (Manual Standpipe System) 
 

Dry riser systems are normally dry without permanent water connection to them 
and depend on the Civil Defence fire truck to pump water into the system. Dry ris-
er system comprises of one or multiple vertical riser pipes or horizontal runs of 
piping that are terminated to the two way breeching inlets located at the ground 
level and connected to the 65mm diameter landing (Fire Department) valve outlets 
coupled or uncoupled with 65mm diameter, 30 m long re-inforced rubber lined 
(RRL) hose with multipurpose hose nozzle that are placed inside a cabinet for the 
use of Civil Defence personnel or other trained fire fighting personnel.  

 
1.3.7.  Wet Riser System (Wet Standpipe System) 

Wet riser systems are normally pressurized with water having permanent water 
supply from fire water pumps and fire water storage tanks. Wet riser system com-
prises of one or multiple vertical riser pipes or horizontal runs of piping that feed 
the Sprinkler System, Water Spray System as well as Hose and Landing Valve con-
nections. These risers are connected to fire pumps and fire water storage tanks 
located within the buildings. 25mm for Hose Reel System, 40 mm for Hose Rack 
system, 65 mm diameter for Landing Valve tapping will be made from the wet riser 
in each floor level and fitted with multipurpose hoses and nozzles that are placed 
inside a cabinet for the use of Civil Defence personnel or other trained fire fighting 
personnel. In addition the four way breeching inlets located at ground level are 
connected to the bottom of the wet riser to pump water from the Civil Defence 
fire truck as supplementary water supply. 

 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 545 of 1348 

1.3.  Fire Hose Systems 
 

1.3.8.  Class I Hose System 

 

 

Class I systems comprises of 65 mm diameter Landing Valve outlets coupled or un-
coupled with 65mm diameter, 30 m long, double jacket synthetic fiber reinforced 
hose with a multipurpose hose nozzle for the use of Civil Defence department per-
sonnel or other trained fire fighting personnel. 

1.3.9.  Class II Hose System 

Class II systems comprise of 25 mm diameter bore for Hose Reel System or 40 mm 
diameter bore for a Hose Rack System, 30 m long double jacket synthetic fiber re-
inforced, coupled with 6 or 8 mm bore multipurpose nozzle, for the use of occu-
pants to extinguish small fires or when the fire is at its incipient stages until the 
arrival of Civil Defence fire fighters.  

1.3.10.  Class III Hose System 
 

Class III system is a combination of both Class I & Class II systems for the use of 
trained personnel and as well as Civil Defence use. In general the class I system 
equipment are installed in lower level or compartment of the FHC and class II sys-
tem equipment in upper level or compartment of FHC.  

1.3.11.  Wet Riser Zoning 
 

A vertical subdivision of a standpipe system by height. 

1.3.12.  High Zone 
 

The high zone within a subdivided standpipe system which is usually due to pres-
sure limitations of the design. (When wet riser FHC height exceeds 45 m from 
pump location or when pressure in the system exceeds 12 bar, standpipe is ar-
ranged in a separate looped zone, known as High Zone).  

 
1.3.13.  Low Zone 
 

The low zone within a subdivided standpipe system which is usually due to pres-
sure limitations of the design. (When wet riser FHC height exceeds 45 m from 
pump location or when pressure in the system exceeds 12 bar, lower section of 
standpipe is arranged in a separate zone, within 12 bar range, known as Low 
Zone).  

 
1.3.14.  Static Pressure 

 Pressure acting on a point in the piping with no flow from the system. 

1.3.15.  Residual Pressure 

 Pressure acting on a point in the piping with flow being delivered or discharged. 

1.3.16.  Pressure Reducing Valve 

 A valve designed for the purpose of reducing the downstream water pressure un-

der both flowing (residual) and no flowing (static) conditions. 

1.3.17.  Rated Capacity 

 The flow available from an outlet, at the designated residual pressure. 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 546 of 1348 

1.4.  Automatic Sprinkler Systems 
 

1.4.1.  Automatic Sprinkler 
 

A fire suppression or control device that operates (bursts) automatically when its 
heat-activated element is heated to its thermal rating or above, allowing water to 
discharge over a specified area. 

 
1.4.2.  Automatic Sprinkler System 
 

For fire protection purposes, the sprinkler system installation includes one or more 
automatic water supplies. The portion of the sprinkler system is a network of spe-
cially sized or hydraulically designed piping installed in a building, structure, or ar-
ea, generally overhead, and to which sprinklers are attached in a systematic 
pattern. The valve controlling each system riser is located in the system riser or its 
supply piping. Each sprinkler system riser includes a device for actuating an alarm 
when the system is in operation. The system is usually activated by heat from a fire 
and discharges water over the fire area. 

 
1.4.3.  High-Piles storage 
 

Solid-piled, palletized, rack storage, bin box, and shelf storage in excess of 3.7 m in 
height. 

 
1.4.4.  Hydraulically Designed System  
 

A calculated sprinkler system in which pipe sizes are selected on a pressure loss 
basis to provide a prescribed water density, in gallons per minute per square foot 
(mm/min), or a prescribed minimum discharge pressure or flow per sprinkler, dis-
tributed with a reasonable degree of uniformity over a specified area. 

 
1.4.5.  Pipe Schedule System 
 

A sprinkler system in which the pipe sizing is selected from a schedule that is de-
termined by the occupancy classification and in which a given number of sprinklers 
are allowed to be supplied from specific sizes of pipe. 

 
1.4.6.  System Working Pressure 
 

The maximum anticipated static (non flowing) or flowing pressure applied to sprin-
kler system components exclusive of surge pressures. 

 
1.4.7.  Closed loop Sprinkler System 
 

A wet pipe sprinkler system having non–fire protection connections to automatic 
sprinkler systems in a closed-loop piping arrangement for the purpose of utilizing 
sprinkler piping to conduct water for heating or cooling, where water is not re-
moved or used from the system but only circulated through the piping system. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 547 of 13481.4.  Automatic Sprinkler Systems 

 
1.4.8.  Dry pipe Pre-action Sprinkler System 
 

A sprinkler system employing automatic sprinklers attached to a piping system 
containing air under pressure with a supplemental detection system installed in 
the same areas as the sprinklers. The operation of the detection system actuates 
tripping devices that open dry pipe valves simultaneously and without loss of air 
pressure in the system. The operation of the detection system also opens listed air 
exhaust valves at the end of the feed main, which usually precedes the opening of 
sprinklers. The detection system also serves as an automatic fire alarm system. 

 
1.4.9.  Deluge Sprinkler System 
 

A sprinkler system employing open sprinklers that are attached to a piping system 
that is connected to a water supply through a valve that is opened by the opera-
tion of a detection system installed in the same areas as the sprinklers. When this 
valve opens, water flows into the piping system and discharges from all sprinklers 
attached thereto. 

The pipes in which the sprinklers are placed, either directly or through risers. 

 
1.4.10.  Branch line 
 
 
1.4.11.  Cross Mains  
 
 
1.4.12.  Feed Mains 
 
 

  

The pipes supplying the branch lines, either directly or through risers. 

The pipes supplying cross mains, either directly or through risers. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 548 of 1348 

 

1.4.  Automatic Sprinkler Systems 

 
 
1.4.14.  Types of Sprinklers, based on installation orientation 
 

1.4.14.1. Upright Sprinkler Head 

A sprinkler designed to be installed in such a way that the water spray is 
directed upwards against the deflector.  
 

1.4.14.2. Pendent Sprinkler Head 

A sprinkler designed to be installed in such a way that the water stream 
is directed downward against the deflector. In pendent there are two 
types based on its mounting application.  
 

1.4.14.3. Recessed Pendent Sprinkler Head 

A sprinkler in which all or part of the body, other than the shank thread, 
is mounted within a recessed housing.  
 

1.4.14.4. Concealed Pendent Sprinkler Head 

A recessed sprinkler concealed with cover plates.  
 

1.4.14.5. Conventional Sprinkler Head 

A sprinkler that is designed to install both pendent or upright position. 

 

 1.4.14.6. Sidewall Sprinkler Head 

A sprinkler having special deflectors that are designed to discharge most 
of the water away from the nearby wall in a pattern resembling one-
quarter of a sphere, with a small portion of the discharge directed at the 
wall behind the sprinkler. 

Figure 9.1.: Types of Sprinklers based on orientation 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 549 of 1348 

1.4.  Automatic Sprinkler Systems 

 
 

1.4.15.  Types of Sprinklers, based on Coverage 
 

1.4.15.1. Standard Coverage Sprinkler Head 

A sprinkler that directs from 40 percent to 60 percent of the total water 
initially in a downward direction and that is designed to be installed 
with the deflector either upright or pendent. Nominal K-factors for 
standard ½ in. *12.7 mm+ sprinklers are 5.6 *Km = 80+. 

 

1.4.15.2. Extended Coverage Sprinkler Head 

Extended coverage sidewall sprinklers are used in the horizontal posi-
tion. They have larger areas of coverage than the areas of coverage al-
lowed for standard sidewall sprinklers. They may be used in light-
hazard occupancies. 

 

1.4.15.3. Large Drop Sprinkler Head 

A type of specific application control mode sprinkler sprinklers with a 
nominal K-factor of 11.2 (Km = 160) The deflector of a large drop sprin-
kler is specially designed and, combined with the greater discharge, 
produces large drops of such size and velocity as to enable the spray to 
penetrate strong updrafts generated by high-challenge fire hazards. 

 
1.4.16.  Types of Sprinklers, based on Heat Sensing Element 
 

1.4.16.1. Standard Response Sprinkler Head 

A type of spray sprinkler that has thermal sensitivity measured in re-
sponse time index (RTI) of 80 (meters-seconds)1/2 or more. 

 

1.4.16.2. Early Suppression Fast-Response (ESFR) Sprinkler  

A type of fast-response sprinkler that has thermal sensitivity measured 
in response time index (RTI) of 50 (meter-seconds)1/2 or less and is listed 
for its capability to provide fire suppression of specific high-challenge 
fire hazards. 

 
1.4.17.  Closed Array 
 

A storage arrangement where air movement through the pile is restricted because 
of 6-in. (152-mm) or less vertical flues. 

 
1.4.18.  Open Array 
 

A storage arrangement where air movement through the pile is enhanced because 
of vertical flues larger than 6 in. (152 mm). 

 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 550 of 13481.4.  Automatic Sprinkler Systems 

 
1.4.19.  Bin Box Storage 
 

Storage in five-sided wood, metal, or cardboard boxes with open face on the aisles. 
Boxes are self-supporting or supported by a structure so designed that little or no 
horizontal or vertical space exists around boxes. 

 The distance from the top of storage to the ceiling sprinkler deflectors. 

 
1.4.20.  Clearance 
 
 
1.4.21.  Encapsulation 
 

A method of packaging consisting of a plastic sheet completely enclosing the sides 
and top of a pallet load containing a combustible commodity or a combustible 
package or a group of combustible commodities or combustible packages. Com-
bustible commodities individually wrapped in plastic sheeting and stored exposed 
in a pallet load also are to be considered encapsulated. 

 
1.4.22.  Expanded (Foamed or Cellular) Plastics 
 

Those plastics, the density of which is reduced by the presence of numerous small 
cavities (cells), interconnecting or not, dispersed throughout their mass. 

 
1.4.23.  Exposed Group A Plastics 
 

Those plastics not in packaging or coverings that absorb water or otherwise appre-
ciably retard the burning hazard of the commodity. (Paper wrapped or encapsulat-
ed, or both, should be considered exposed.) 

 
1.4.24.  Palletized Storage 
 

Storage of commodities on pallets or other storage aids that form horizontal spac-
es between tiers of storage. 

 
1.4.25.  Shelf Storage 
 

Storage on structures less than 30 in. (76.2 cm) deep with shelves usually 2 ft. (0.6 
m) apart vertically and separated by approximately 30-in. (76.2-cm) aisles. 

 
1.4.26.  Rack 
 

Any combination of vertical, horizontal, and diagonal members that supports 
stored materials. Some rack structures use solid shelves. Racks can be fixed, porta-
ble, or movable. Loading can be either manual, using lift trucks, stacker cranes, or 
hand placement or automatic , using machine-controlled storage and retrieval sys-
tems. 

 
1.4.27.  Double Row Racks 
 

Two single-row racks placed back-to-back having a combined width up to 3.7 m, 
with aisles at least 1.1 m on each side. 

 
1.4.28.  Single Row Racks 
 

Racks that have no longitudinal flue space and that have a width up to 1.8 m with 
aisles at least 1.1 m from other storage. 

 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 551 of 13481.4.  Automatic Sprinkler Systems 

 
 
1.4.29.  Multiple Row Racks 
 

Racks greater than 3.7 m wide or single- or double-row racks separated by aisles 
less than 1.1 m wide having an overall width greater than 3.7 m. 

K-factor is a dimensionless number used in fire protection hydraulics. 

 
1.4.30.  K-factor 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Q =K      P   OR K = Q/P0.5  Where,  

the Flow in gpm (L/Min),  
the Pressure in psi (bar) 

Q is 
P is 
K is a flow constant factor 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 552 of 1348 

1.5.  Foam Systems 

 
1.5.1.  Foam 
 

 Foam is a stable aggregation of small gas filled bubbles of lower density than oil or 
water, formed from aqueous solutions of specially formulated concentrated liquid 
foaming agents that exhibits a tenacity for covering horizontal surfaces, producing 
an air excluding, cooling continuous layer of vapour-sealing, water-bearing materi-
al that prevents combustion.  

 
1.5.2.  Foam Concentrate 
 

Foam concentrate is a concentrated liquid foaming agent as received from the 
manufacturer. 

 
1.5.3.  Foam Solution  
 

A homogeneous mixture of water and foam concentrate in the proper proportions. 
For the purpose of this document, “foam solution” and “solution” are used inter-
changeably. 

 
1.5.4.  Foam Proportioning 
 

Proportioning is the continuous introduction of foam concentrate at the recom-
mended ratio into the water stream to form foam solution 

 
1.5.5.  Foam-Water Sprinkler System  
 

A special system that is pipe-connected to a source of foam concentrate and to a 
water supply. The system is equipped with appropriate discharge devices for extin-
guishing agent discharge and for distribution over the area to be protected. The 
piping system is connected to the water supply through a control valve that usually 
is actuated by the operation of automatic detection equipment that is installed in 
the same areas as the sprinklers. When this valve opens, water flows into the pip-
ing system, foam concentrate is injected into the water, and the resulting foam 
solution discharging through the discharge devices generates and distributes foam. 
Upon exhaustion of the foam concentrate supply, water discharge follows and con-
tinues until shut off manually. Systems can be used for discharge of water first, 
followed by a discharge of foam for a specified period, and then followed by water 
until they manually shut off. Existing deluge sprinkler systems that have been con-
verted to the use of aqueous film-forming foam or film-forming fluoroprotein foam 
are classified as foam-water sprinkler systems. 

 
1.5.6.  Foam-Water Deluge System  
 

A foam-water sprinkler system employing open discharge devices, which are 
attached to a piping system that is connected to a water supply through a valve 
that is opened by the operation of a detection system, which is installed in the 
same areas as the discharge devices. When this valve opens, water flows into the 
piping system and discharges from all discharge devices attached thereto. 

 
1.5.7.  Foam Discharge Duration 
 

Systems shall deliver foam to the hazards they protect for a specified period at giv-
en densities, either prior to water discharge or following water discharge, depend-
ing upon system design purpose. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 553 of 1348 

1.5.  Foam Systems 

 
1.5.8.  Aqueous Film Forming Foam (AFFF) Concentrate  
 

This concentrate is based on fluorinated surfactants plus foam stabilizers and usu-
ally diluted with water to a 1 percent, 3 percent, or 6 percent solution. The foam 
formed acts as a barrier both to exclude air or oxygen and to develop an aqueous 
film on the fuel surface capable of suppressing the evolution of fuel vapors. The 
foam produced with AFFF concentrate is dry chemical compatible and thus is suita-
ble for combined use with dry chemicals. 

 
1.5.9.  Film Forming Flouroprotein (AFFP) Foam Concentrate  
 

This concentrate uses fluorinated surfactants to produce a fluid aqueous film for 
suppressing hydrocarbon fuel vapors. This type of foam utilizes a protein base plus 
stabilizing additives and inhibitors to protect against freezing, corrosion, and bac-
terial decomposition, and it also resists fuel pickup. The foam is usually diluted 
with water to a 3 percent or 6 percent solution and is dry chemical compatible. 

 
1.5.10.  Alcohol Resistant Foam Concentrate  
 

This concentrate is used for fighting fires on water-soluble materials and other 
fuels destructive to regular, AFFF, or FFFP foams, as well as for fires involving hy-
drocarbons. There are three general types. One is based on water-soluble natural 
polymers, such as protein or fluoroprotein concentrates, and also contains alcohol-
insoluble materials that precipitate as an insoluble barrier in the bubble structure. 
The second type is based on synthetic concentrates and contains a gelling agent 
that surrounds the foam bubbles and forms a protective raft on the surface of wa-
ter-soluble fuels; these foams can also have film-forming characteristics on hydro-
carbon fuels. The third type is based on both water-soluble natural polymers, such 
as fluoroprotein, and contains a gelling agent that protects the foam from water-
soluble fuels. This foam can also have film-forming and fluoroprotein characteris-
tics on hydrocarbon fuels. Alcohol-resistant foam concentrates are generally used 
in concentrations of 3 percent to 10 percent solutions, depending on the nature of 
the hazard to be protected and the type of concentrate. 

 
1.5.11.  Medium and High Expansion Foam Concentrate  
 

This concentrate, which is usually derived from hydrocarbon surfactants, is used in 
specially designed equipment to produce foams having foam-to-solution volume 
ratios of 20:1 to approximately 1000:1. This equipment can be air-aspirating or 
blower-fan type. 

 
1.5.12.  Air Aspirating Discharging Devices  
 

Devices specially designed to aspirate and mix air into the foam solution to gener-
ate foam, followed by foam discharge in a specific design pattern. 

Devices designed to provide a specific water discharge pattern. 

 
1.5.13.  Non-Air Aspirating Discharging Devices  
 
 
1.5.14.  Fixed Foam Discharge Outlet.  
 

A device permanently attached to a tank, dike, or other containment structure, 
designed to introduce foam. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 554 of 1348 
1.5.17.  Expansion 
 
 
1.5.18.  Semi subsurface Foam Injection 
 

 
1.5.19.  Subsurface Foam Injection 
 
 
1.5.20.  Fixed System 
 

Discharge of foam at the liquid surface within a storage tank from a floating hose 
that rises from a piped container near the tank bottom. 

Discharge of foam into a storage tank from an outlet near the tank bottom. 

 

1.5.  Foam Systems 

 
1.5.15.  Type I Discharge Outlet.  
 

An approved discharge outlet that conducts and delivers foam gently onto the liq-
uid surface without submergence of the foam or agitation of the surface. 

 
1.5.16.  Type II Discharge Outlet.  
 

An approved discharge outlet that does not deliver foam gently onto the liquid 
surface but is designed to lessen submergence of the foam and agitation of the 
surface. 

The ratio of the final foam volume to the original foam solution volume. 

A complete installation in which foam is piped from a central foam station, dis-
charging through fixed delivery outlets to the hazard to be protected with perma-
nently installed pumps where required. 

 
1.5.21.  Mobile System 
 

Any type of foam-producing unit that is mounted on wheels and that is self-
propelled or towed by a vehicle and can be connected to a water supply or can 
utilize a premixed foam solution. 

 
1.5.22.  Fixed Monitor (Cannon) 
 

A device that delivers a large foam stream and is mounted on a stationary support 
that either is elevated or is at grade. 

 
1.5.23.  Portable Monitor (Cannon) 
 

A device that delivers a foam monitor stream and is mounted on a movable sup-
port or wheels so it can be transported to the fire scene. 

 
1.5.24.  Balanced Pressure Bladder Tank 
 

A foam concentrate tank fitted with an internal bladder which uses water flow 
through a modified venturi type proportioner to control the foam concentrate in-
jection rate by displacing the foam concentrate within the bladder with water out-
side the bladder. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 555 of 1348 

1.6.  Water Spray Systems 

 
1.6.1.  Water Spray 
 

Water in a form having a predetermined pattern, particle size, velocity, and density 
discharge from specially designed nozzles or devices. 

 
1.6.2.  Automatic Water Spray Nozzle 
 

A nozzle intended to open automatically by the operation of a heat responsive ele-
ment that maintains the discharge orifice closed by means such as the exertion of 
force on a cap (button or disc), that when discharging water under pressure, will 
distribute the water in a specific and, directional pattern. 

 
1.6.3.  Open Water Spray Nozzle 
 

An open water discharge device that, when discharging water under pressure, will 
distribute the water in a specific, directional pattern. 

 
1.6.4.  Deluge Valve 
 

A type of system actuation valve that is opened by the operation of a discharging 
device installed in the same areas as the spray nozzles or by remote manual opera-
tion supplying water to all spray nozzles. 

 
1.6.5.  System Actuation Valve 
 
 
1.6.6.  Density  
 

The main valve that controls the flow of water into the water spray system. 

The unit rate of water application to an area or surface expressed in gpm/ft2
min)/m2 . 

  or L/

 
1.6.7.  Exposure Protection 
 

Absorption of heat through application of water spray to structures or equipment 
exposed to a fire, to limit surface temperature to a level that will minimize damage 
and prevent failure. 

 
1.6.8.  Electrical Clearance 
 

The air distance between the water spray equipment, including piping and nozzles, 
and unenclosed or uninsulated live electrical components at other than ground 
potential. 

 
1.6.9.  Pilot Sprinkler 
 

An automatic sprinkler or thermostatic fixed temperature release device used as a 
detector to pneumatically or hydraulically release the system actuation valve. 

 
1.6.10.  Area Application 
 

The application of ultra high-speed water spray over a specific floor area or over 
the surface area of a specific object. 

 
1.6.11.  Local Application 
 

The application of ultra high-speed water spray on a specific point or points of igni-
tion, such as cutting, mixing or grinding operations. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 556 of 1348 

1.6.  Water Spray Systems 

 
 
1.6.12.  Pilot Sprinkler 
 

An automatic sprinkler or thermostatic fixed temperature release device used as a 
detector to pneumatically or hydraulically release the system actuation valve. 

 
1.6.13.  Fire Area 
 

An area that is physically separated from other areas by space, barriers, walls, or 
other means in order to contain fire within that area. 

 
1.6.14.  Impingement 
 

The striking of a protected surface by water droplets issuing directly from a water 
spray nozzle. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 557 of 1348 

1.7.  Yard Hydrant Systems 

 
 
1.7.1.  Fire Service Access Level 
 

Level where Civil Defence Fire Appliances (Fire Truck/Engine) are deployed and 
where fire fighters have direct access into the building . 

 
1.7.2.  Fire Access Roadway 
 

The road to the building or structure to allow access for Civil Defence fire-fighting 
and rescue apparatus. 

 
1.7.3.  Fire Accessway 
 

The path adjacent to the building or structure to allow operational setup for Civil 
Defence fire-fighting and rescue apparatus such as Aerial Appliances.  

 
1.7.4.  Rated Capacity 
 

The flow available from a hydrant at the designated residual pressure (rated pres-
sure), either measured or calculated. 

 
1.7.5.  Residual Pressure 
 

The pressure that exists in the distribution system, measured at the residual hy-
drant at the time the flow readings are taken at the flow hydrants. 

 
1.7.6.  Static Pressure 
 

The pressure that exists at a given point under normal distribution system condi-
tions measured at the residual hydrant with no hydrants flowing. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 558 of 1348 

1.7.  Clean Agent Systems 

 
1.7.1.  Clean Agent 
 

Electrically nonconducting, volatile, or gaseous fire extinguishing agent that does 
not leave a residue upon discharge.  

 
1.7.2.  Clean Agent Concentration 
 
 
1.7.3.  Halocarbon Agent 
 

The portion of agent in an agent-air mixture expressed in volume percent. 

An agent that contains as primary components one or more organic compounds 
containing one or more of the elements fluorine, chlorine, bromine, or iodine. 

 
1.7.4. 
 

Inert Gas Agent 
An agent that contains as primary components one or more of the gases helium, 
neon, argon, or nitrogen. Inert gas agents that are blends of gases can also contain 
carbon dioxide as a secondary component. 

 
1.7.5.  Total Flooding Quantity 
 
 
1.7.6.  Minimum Design Quantity (MDQ) 
 
 
1.7.7.  Design Factor 
   

The amount of halocarbon agent required to achieve the design concentration. 

The quantity of agent required to achieve the minimum design concentration. 

A fraction of the agent minimum design quantity (MDQ) added thereto deemed 
appropriate due to a specific feature of the protection application or design of the 
suppression system. 

1.7.8.  Final Design Quantity 
 

The quantity of agent determined from the agent minimum design quantity as ad-
justed to account for design factors and pressure adjustment. 

1.7.9.  Local Application System.  
 

A system consisting of a supply of extinguishing agent arranged to discharge direct-
ly on the burning material or equipment. 

1.7.10.  Pre-Engineered System.  
 

A system having predetermined flow rates, nozzle pressures, and quantities of 
agent. These systems have the specific pipe size, maximum and minimum pipe 
lengths, flexible hose specifications, number of fittings, and number and types of 
nozzles prescribed by a testing laboratory. The hazards protected by these systems 
are specifically limited as to type and size by a testing laboratory based upon actual 
fire tests. Limitations on hazards that can be protected by these systems are con-
tained in the manufacturer’s installation manual, which is referenced as part of the 
listing. 

1.7.11.  Total Flooding System.  
 

A system consisting of an agent supply and distribution network with discharge 
nozzles designed to achieve a total flooding condition in a hazard volume. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 559 of 1348 

1.7.  Clean Agent Systems 

 
1.7.12.  Fill Density 
 

Mass of agent per unit of container volume (the customary units are lb/ft3 or kg/
m3). 

 
1.7.13.  No Observed Adverse Effect Level (NOAEL) 
 

The highest concentration at which no adverse toxicological or physiological effect 
has been observed. 

 
1.7.14.  Lowest Observed Adverse Effect Level (LOAEL) 
 

The lowest concentration at which adverse toxicological or physiological effect has 
been observed. 

Area that is intended for occupancy. 

 
1.7.15.  Normally Occupied Area 
 
 
1.7.16.  Unoccupied Area 
 

 

Area that is intended only for equipment and machinery providing services with 
periodic visits by personnel for repair and maintenance.   
However,  with respect to the use of clean agent systems, the LV rooms, transform-
er rooms, telephone rooms, generator rooms and other such equipment/  machin-
ery rooms located in the occupied buildings or attached to occupied buildings, are 
not considered as unoccupied area because of the proximity of these rooms to 
public movement and the  possible adverse effects of clean agents.   

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 560 of 1348 

1.8.  Dry Chemical Systems 

 
1.8.1.  Dry Chemical 
 

A powder composed of very small particles, usually sodium bicarbonate, potassium 
bicarbonate, or ammonium phosphate based with added particulate material sup-
plemented by a special treatment to provide resistance to packing, resistance to 
moisture absorption (caking), and the proper flow capabilities. 

 
1.8.2.  Multipurpose Dry Chemical 
 

Ammonium phosphate-based extinguishing agent that is effective on fires involv-
ing both ordinary combustibles, such as wood or paper, and fires involving flamma-
ble liquids. 

 
1.8.3.  Dry Chemical System 
 

A means of applying dry chemical that can be automatically or manually activated 
to discharge through a distribution system onto or into the protected hazard. The 
system includes auxiliary equipment. 

 
1.8.4.  Engineered System 
 

Those requiring individual calculation and design to determine the flow rates, noz-
zle pressures, pipe size, area or volume protected by each nozzle, quantities of dry 
chemical, number and types of nozzles, and their placement in a specific system. 

 
1.8.5.  Pre-Engineered Systems 
 

Those having predetermined flow rates, nozzle pressures, and quantities of dry 
chemical. 

 
1.8.6.  Local Application System 
 

A supply of dry chemical permanently connected to fixed piping with nozzles ar-
ranged to discharge directly onto the fire. 

 
1.8.7.  Total Flooding System 
 

A supply of dry chemical permanently connected to fixed piping and nozzles that 
are arranged to discharge dry chemical into an enclosure surrounding the hazard. 

The medium used to discharge dry chemicals from container. 

 
1.8.8.  Expellant Gas 
 
 
1.8.9.  Discharge Nozzle 
 

Device from which the dry chemical is discharged to provide for the suppression of 
a fire in the designated hazard. 

 
1.8.10.  Caking 
 

A phenomenon that occurs when moisture chemically reacts with a dry chemical 
fire-extinguishing agent. This reaction results in materials that, being hydrated by 
moisture, stick together to form a large agglomerate, or what is more commonly 
referred to as lumps. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 561 of 1348 

1.9.  Wet Chemical Systems 

 
1.9.1.  Wet Chemical, Liquid Agent, Wet Agent 
 

Normally an aqueous solution of organic or inorganic salts or a combination there-
of that forms an extinguishing agent. 

 
1.9.2.  Pre-Engineered Systems 
 

Those having predetermined flow rates, nozzle pressures, and quantities of extin-
guishing agent. These systems have the specific pipe size, maximum and minimum 
pipe lengths, flexible hose specifications, number of fittings, and number and types 
of nozzles prescribed by a testing laboratory. The maximum and minimum pipe 
lengths and the number of fittings shall be permitted to be expressed in equivalent 
feet of pipe. The hazards protected by these systems are specifically limited as to 
type and size by a testing laboratory, based on actual fire tests. Limitations on haz-
ards that are permitted to be protected by these systems and piping and nozzle 
configurations are contained in the manufacturer’s listed installation and mainte-
nance manual, which is part of the listing of the system. Pre-engineered systems 
can be wet as well as dry chemical systems. 

 
1.9.3.  Automatic Operation 
 

Operation without human intervention. This operation includes, but is not limited 
to, heat, rate of heat rise, smoke, or pressure change. 

The medium used to discharge the extinguishing agent from container. 

 
1.9.4.  Expellant Gas 
 
 
1.9.5.  Auxiliary Equipment 
 

 
1.9.6.  Branch Duct 
 
 
1.9.7.  Common Duct 
 
 
1.9.8.  Recharge 
 
 

Listed equipment used in conjunction with the wet chemical systems, for example, 
to shut down power, fuel, or ventilation to the hazard being protected or to initi-
ate signaling devices. 

The duct work that contains the exhaust air from a single hood or hazard area. 

The duct work containing the exhaust air from two or more branch ducts. 

The replacement of the extinguishing agent and expellant gas. 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 562 of 1348 

1.10.  Water Mist Systems 

 
1.10.1.  Water Mist 
 

A water spray for which the Dv0.99, ( Dvf -A drop diameter such that the cumulative 
volume, from zero diameter to this respective diameter, is the fraction, f, of the 
corresponding sum of the total distribution) for the flow-weighted cumulative vol-
umetric distribution of water droplets is less than 1000 μm within the nozzle oper-
ating pressure range. 

 
1.10.2.  Water Mist System 
 

A distribution system connected to a water supply or water and atomizing media 
supply that is equipped with one or more nozzles capable of delivering water mist 
intended to control, suppress, or extinguish fires and that has been demonstrated 
to meet the performance requirements of its listing and this standard. 

 
1.10.3.  Water Mist Atomizing Media 
 

Compressed air or other gases that produce water mist by mechanical mixing with 
water. 

 
1.10.4.  Water Mist Nozzle 
 

A special purpose device, containing one or more orifices, designed to produce and 
deliver a water spray meeting either the definition of ‘water mist’ or meeting the 
specific requirements of an approved water mist fire test protocol. 

Any chemical or mixture of chemicals intentionally introduced into the system. 

 
1.10.5.  Additive 
 
 
1.10.6.  High Pressure System 
 

A water mist system where the distribution system piping is exposed to pressures 
of 34.5 bar (500 psi) or greater. 

 
1.10.7.  Intermediate Pressure System 
 

A water mist system where the distribution system piping is exposed to pressures 
greater than 12.1 bar (175 psi) but less than 34.5 bar (500 psi). 

 
1.10.8.  Low Pressure System 
 

A water mist system where the distribution piping is exposed to pressures of 12.1 
bar (175 psi) or less. 

 
1.10.9.  Propellant  
 

Compressed gas used as a prime mover to push water out of storage vessels, 
through pipe networks, or through distribution components. 

 
1.10.10.  Single Fuel System  

 A water mist system utilizing a single piping system to supply each nozzle 

. 
1.10.11.  Twin Fuel System  

 A water mist system in which water and an atomizing medium are supplied to 
the water mist nozzle utilizing a separate piping system for each medium or a 
single piping system for both. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 563 of 1348 

1.10.  Water Mist Systems 

 
1.10.12.  Deluge Water Mist System 
 

A water mist system utilizing nonautomatic mist nozzles (open) attached to a 
piping network connected to the fluid supply(ies) through a valve controlled by 
an independent detection system installed in the same area as the mist nozzles. 

 
1.10.13.  Dry Pipe Water Mist System 
 

A water mist system using automatic nozzles attached to a piping system con-
taining air, nitrogen, or inert gas under pressure, the release of which (as from 
an opening of an automatic nozzle) allows the water pressure to open a dry pipe 
valve. The water then flows into the piping system and out through any open 
nozzles. 

 
1.10.14.  Engineered Water Mist System 
 

Those systems that need individual calculation and design to determine the flow 
rates, nozzle pressures, pipe size, area, or volume protected by each nozzle, dis-
charge density of water mist, the number and types of nozzles, and the nozzle 
placement in a specific system. 

 
1.10.15.  Local Application Water Mist System 
 

A water mist system arranged to discharge directly on an object or hazard in an 
enclosed, unenclosed, or open outdoor condition. 

 
 
1.10.16.  Pre-action Water Mist System 
 

A water mist system using automatic nozzles attached to a piping system that 
contains air that might or might not be under pressure, with a supplemental de-
tection system installed in the same areas as the mist nozzles. The actuation of 
the detection system opens a valve that allows water to flow into the piping sys-
tem and discharges through all opened nozzles in the system. 

 
1.10.17.  Wet Pipe Water Mist System 
 

A water mist system using automatic nozzles attached to a piping system con-
taining water and connected to a water supply so that water discharges immedi-
ately from nozzles operated by the heat from a fire. 

 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 564 of 1348 

2.  Fire Protection Systems 

 

2.1.  Intention 

 2.1.1.   The Fire Protection System requirements are to address the following. 

 

2.1.1.1.  To provide an automatic as well as manual approach to extinguish fires.  
 
2.1.1.2.  Along with their equipment, Civil Defence Firefighters also utilize the Fire 

Protection Systems installed in the occupancies, to manually fight fires 
thereby protecting the property and lives of people. Thus ensuring the de-
sign of the fire protection system of the building and that its installation is in 
good working condition represents a priority of Civil Defence. 
 

2.1.1.3.  To ensure that the maintenance of Fire Protection systems is carried out pe-

riodically through Civil Defence approved contractors. 

 

2.2.  Fire Protection Concept 

2.2.1.  Fire Protection or Fire Extinguishment can be 
achieved with various techniques and mecha-
nisms. However, the concepts behind all the ex-
tinguishing measures are basically one or more 
of the following.  

 

2.2.1.1.  Physically separate the combustible 

material from the flame.  

 
2.2.1.2.  Removing or Reducing the Oxygen 

supply.  

 
2.2.1.3.  Reducing the temperature of the com-

Did You Know? 

The only type of sprinkler 

designed to extinguish 

fire is the ESFR type 

sprinkler (Early Suppres-

sion Fast Response). 

Other types of sprinklers 

are designed to control 

and restrict the fire 

bustible or the flame. 

spread. 

 
2.2.1.4. 

 

Introducing the chemicals that modify 
the combustion chemistry. 

2.2.2.  The requirements, design criteria, system specifications, inspection and maintenance 
requirements etc. provided in this chapter are minimum guidelines and a code of prac-
tice. It is the consultant’s responsibility to refer to further codes and standards, inter-
national or local as mentioned but not limited to Section 2.2.3., to evaluate the design 
details, the applications of fire protection systems, their suitability, the environmental 
impact and test certifications to comply in full in their design, material specifications, 
installation, inspection and maintenance. 

 
2.2.3. 

International codes and standards referred to for this chapter are NFPA 11, NFPA 12, 
NFPA 13, NFPA 14, NFPA 15, NFPA 16, NFPA 17, NFPA 20, NFPA 22, NFPA 24, NFPA 
25, 30, NFPA 33, NFPA 45, NFPA 75, NFPA 76, NFPA 110, NFPA 750, NFPA 2001, NFPA 
2010,  NFPA Handbook, IBC, IFC, Manufacturer’s design guidelines and installation 
specifications. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 565 of 13482.3.  Types of Fire Protection Systems 

2.3.1.  Fire Protection Systems discussed in this chapter are limited to the Civil Defence 

listed and approved Systems. Any system that is not already listed or registered 
by Civil Defence is not mentioned in this Chapter.  

2.3.2.  Water based Fire Protection Systems 

2.3.2.1.  Dry Riser System (DRS) 
2.3.2.2.  Wet Riser System (WRS)  
2.3.2.3.  Yard Hydrant System (YHS) 
2.3.2.4.  Fire Hose Reel/Rack System (FHS) 
2.3.2.5.  Automatic Sprinkler System (AS) 
2.3.2.6.  Pre-action Sprinkler System (YHS) 
2.3.2.7.  Water Spray System (WSS) 
2.3.2.8.  Water Mist System (WMS) 
2.3.2.9.  Water Deluge System (WDS) 

2.3.3.  Foam and Water based Fire Protection Systems 

2.3.2.1.  Foam Sprinkler System (FSS) 
2.3.2.2.  Foam Monitor System (FMS)  
2.3.2.3.  Foam Injection System (FIS) 
2.3.2.4.  Foam Deluge System (FDS) 
2.3.2.5.  Foam Pouring System (FPS) 
2.3.2.6.  Foam Hand Hose System (FHS) 

 

2.3.4.  Clean Agent based Fire Protection Systems 

2.3.4.1.  Chemical agent  System (CCAS) 
2.3.4.2.  Inert Gas System (ICAS)  

 

2.3.5.  Dry Chemical System (DCS) 
2.3.6.  Wet Chemical System (WCS) 
2.3.7.  Portable Fire Extinguisher (FE) 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 566 of 1348 

3. Details of Fire Protection Systems 
 

3.1.  General Requirements 
 

3.1.1. 

 The general requirements for fire pumps, pipes, fittings, fire water tanks that are 
components of water based fire protection system shall be as per Table 9.3. 

Table 9.3: General Requirements of Water Based Fire Protection Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. FIRE PUMPS 

i.  Fire Pumps shall be restricted to a centrifugal or Horizontal Displacement, single 

stage and multistage pumps of Horizontal or Vertical Turbine shaft type only. 

ii.  Fire pumps shall be dedicated to and listed for fire protection service. 
iii.  All fire pumps, complete with driver, control panel and fuel supply shall be tested 

as an assembly as per Section 6 of this chapter and registered and listed by Civil 
Defence. 

iv.  The fire pump assembly, consisting of Pump, Driver, Controller, Automatic Trans-
fer Switch and Accessories shall perform in accordance with the requirements of 
this Code and the manufacturer's specifications, as an entire unit when installed 
or when components are replaced or when repairs are performed on installed 
system. This “Fire Pump Unit Performance” shall be declared by a single entity as 
having the “Unit Responsibility”. Civil Defence designates the Fire Pump manu-
facturer as such “Unit Responsibility Holder” and the Fire pump manufacturer 
shall declare such unit responsibility in an undertaking and shall be submitted to 
Civil Defence as part of documentation during system commissioning and ac-
ceptance.  

v.  The complete fire pump unit shall be field acceptance tested for proper  and in-

tended performance. 

vi.  The net pump shutoff (churn) pressure plus the maximum static suction pressure, 

adjusted for elevation, shall not exceed the pressure for which the system com-
ponents are rated. 

vii.  A centrifugal fire pump shall be selected to operate at less than or equal to 150 %

of the rated capacity. 

viii. The selection of fire pump shall be such that the pressure in the system it is serv-
ing shall not exceed 24 bar at any point, at any time with fire pump set to cut-off 
at 140% of rated operational pressure. 

ix.  Fire Pumps shall have a permanent steel nameplate clearly showing the name , 

brand, pressure ratings, flow ratings, working temperatures etc. 

x.  All fire pumps shall have a flooded water supply from the dedicated fire water 
tank. Where the flooded positive supply of water to fire pumps is not possible, 
the vertical turbine type fire pumps shall be provided for the negative suction of 
fire water. 

xi.  Please see Chapter 1., Table 1.9.2., for the location and sizes of fire pump rooms. 
xii.   The Fire Pump provided for fire protection shall be a “Set” consisting of 1 Electric 

driven fire pump, 1 diesel driven fire pump and 1 Jockey pump to maintain the 
system pressure, complete with controllers. 

xiii.  The Fire Pump provided at higher levels, other than lowest level, for fire protec-

tion in Superhighrise buildings shall be permitted to be a “Set” consisting of 2 
Electric driven fire pumps, a main and a standby along with 1 Jockey pump to 
maintain the system pressure, complete with controllers. The power supply for 
the permitted 2 electric pumps shall be from different sources. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 567 of 1348 

Table 9.3: General Requirements of Water Based Fire Protection Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. FIRE PUMPS 

xiv.    Diesel Fire Pumps shall have a diesel filtration system to prevent the stagna-

tion and frequent changing of diesel fuel. 

xv.     Fire Pump set shall be located at the lowest level of the system in the build-

ing. However, from lowest level of the building to the ground floor level 
with fire access, is acceptable.  

xvi.    See Chapter 1, Table 1.9.2. for Pump room sizes and construction. 
xvii.   Elbows and tees with a centerline plane parallel to a horizontal split-case 
pump shaft shall only be permitted in the suction line where the distance 
between the flanges of the pump suction intake and the elbow and tee is 
greater than 10 times the suction pipe diameter.  

xviii.  An exclusive, dedicated fire pump test line shall be provided from the 

fire pump discharge header. 

2. ELECTRICAL 

i.  The Primary Power Supply to the main electrical Fire Pump and the Jockey 

POWER SUPPLY 

Pump shall be directly from the power utility company, in a dedicated distribu-
tion board located inside the pump room. 

ii.  Where 2 electrical fire pumps are permitted in accordance with                          
Table 9.3.1.xii., power supply for main electrical pump shall be in accordance 
with Table 9.3.2.i. The power supply to the standby electrical pump shall be 
from separate power source such as building UPS, Diesel generator or alterna-
tive power source. 

iii. Where the fire pump set consists of 1 electrical and 1 diesel fire pump, the die-

sel fire pump shall have 8 hour operating capacity and such diesel fire pump 
shall not be required to have secondary power supply back-up. 

iv. The power supply from the power utility company to fire pumps shall be di-

rectly from the transformer without passing through building distribution 
boards, with only one lockable disconnecting source. See Figure 9.2.a. and Fig-
ure 9.2.b. 

v.  Such disconnecting means shall be remote, separate from the building discon-
necting means, clearly identified with the sign in bold- “Fire Pump Disconnect/
DO NOT SWITCH OFF”. 

vi. The power supply to multiple electrical fire pumps shall be through dedicated 

wiring, separate for each pump.,  

vii. All the wiring from the power utility company to the Fire pump controllers and 

to the pumps shall be 2 hour fire rated in a separate metal conduit. 

viii.All electrical equipment /installation methods shall comply with NFPA 70, Arti-

cle 695. 

3. FIRE PUMP          

i.  Fire pump controllers shall be listed and approved by international testing la-

CONTROLLER 

boratories, certified by international conformity certification bodies and listed 
by Civil Defence. 

ii.  This controllers shall be wired, assembled, programmed, tested, certified and 

ready for immediate installation. 

iii. Controllers shall not be assembled at site. 
iv. Fire pump controller shall have the approved soft starter.  
v.  Fire pump controllers with inbuilt and listed VFD (Variable Frequency 

Drive) shall be permitted. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 568 of 1348 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 569 of 1348 

Table 9.3: General Requirements of Water Based Fire Protection Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

i.  The fire water shall be stored in a permanent “Fire Water Tank” having two compart-
ments or in two interconnected tanks with total effective fire water reserve to cater 
the pumping demand of not less than the duration required by individual systems 
and occupancies as required by other sections of this chapter. 

ii.  Interconnection between water tank compartments shall be with isolation valves, 

such that each compartment is able to be isolated. Such isolation vales shall be 
locked in normally open position. 

iii. Water tank cleaning or maintenance process shall be allowed one compartment at a 
time such that the fire water supply from one compartment shall always be available 
for the fire protection systems. 

iv. The domestic water reserve shall be permitted and preferred to be combined with a 

fire water reserve, to prevent stagnation, provided the fire reserve level is main-
tained at all times. 

v.  Fire water tanks shall be provided with a filling connection directly from the power 

utility company with a float operated valve for an automatic refilling. 

vi. Fire water, where not supplied directly from power utility company, shall be potable 
type or TSE. Where TSE (Tested Sewage Effluent) water is used, it shall be tested and 
certified to be used for fire protection purposes. 

vii. Fire water tanks shall be located and constructed such that the fire pump set gets 

flooded water supply in case of fire pumps are of horizontal centrifugal type.  

viii.The discharge pipe size shall not be less than 6 in. (150 mm) for tanks up to and in-

cluding a 25,000 gal (94.63 m3) capacity and shall not be less than 8 in. (200 mm) for 
capacities of 30,000 gal to 100,000 gal (113.55 m3 to 378.50 m3), or 10 in. (250 mm) 
for greater capacities. 

ix. The fire water tanks shall be provided with drain arrangement, overflow connection, 

access manhole, ladders, level indicators, low level switch, etc. 

x.  An approved water level gauge and indicator shall be installed and interfaced with 

BMS and 24x7 Civil Defence monitoring system. 

xi. See Chapter 1, Table 1.9.3A.  and Table 1.9.3B for Water Tank construction. 

4.  FIRE       
WATER 
TANK 

 
 

Points to Ponder 

During fire emergencies, Civil Defence Personnel refill the Fire water tank from the fire 
tanker as one of their first strategy to ensure adequate water is available to the fire sys-
tems. Without an adequate and efficient drainage arrangement around the fire water tank, 
floor corridors, the basement area, could be flooded with an excess of water that could 
compromise the safety of evacuees, pump room and of the controllers and hamper the 
fire fighting operations. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 570 of 1348 

 
 

ITEMS 

5. DRAINAGE 

6. PIPING 

7. FITTINGS 

Table 9.3: General Requirements of Water Based Fire Protection Systems 

REQUIREMENTS 

i.  The Fire water tank area shall be provided with an adequate drainage facility and 
an arrangement such that over filling tank shall not flood the area and the pump 
room. 

ii.  The pump room and floor corridors shall be provided with a drainage facility to 

drain the dripped and leaked water OR water flooded during firefighting operation. 

i.  The aboveground fire protection Pipes shall be threaded for Lowrise buildings and 
in welded steel for Midrise and Highrise buildings, approved and listed by Civil De-
fence as per test standards mentioned in Section 6. of this chapter. 

ii.  Underground fire protection pipes shall be HDPE (High density Polyethylene), mini-

mum of DR-9 (Dimension Ratio) rating, compatible with the local temperature 
ratings, approved and listed by Civil Defence as per test standards mentioned in 
Section 6. of this chapter. 

iii. Pipes shall be rated for working pressures not less than the maximum pressure it 

serves as per the design and corresponding locations within the system.  

iv. Pipes shall be rated for working temperatures not less than the maximum tempera-

ture statistics of the country terrain. 

v.  Pipe sizes connecting to Fire Pump System shall be as per Table 9.3.a. 

i.  Steel Fittings shall be threaded for Lowrise buildings and in butt welded steel for 
Midrise and Highrise buildings, approved and listed by Civil Defence as per tests 
mentioned in Section 6. of this chapter. 

ii.  The underground piping network fittings shall be HDPE, DR-9, approved and listed 
by Civil Defence as per tests mentioned in Section 6. of this chapter. HDPE fittings 
shall be butt fusion welded as per the manufacturer's instructions. 

iii. Fittings shall be rated for working pressures not less than the maximum pressure it 

serves as per the design and corresponding locations within the system. 

iv. Pipes shall be rated for working temperatures not less than the maximum tempera-

ture statistics of the country terrain. 

v.  Screwed unions shall not be used. 
vi. A one piece reducing fitting shall be used wherever a change is made in the size of 

pipe. 

8.  ATS 

(AUTOMATIC 
TRANSFER 
SWITCH/ 
POWER 
TRANSFER 
SWITCH)  

 
ATS IS NOT 
REQUIRED 
WHERE PUMP 
SET PROVIDED 
IS  
1 ELECTRICAL 
1 DIESEL &  
1 JOCKEY 

i.  Where required, a dedicated ATS (Automatic Transfer Switch) shall be provided in 
the pump room for power transfer from primary supply, power utility company to 
secondary, (diesel generator/UPS) standby power provisions. See Figure 9.2. 

ii.  ATS can be built in as integral part of an approved and fire pump controller or ded-

icated ATS as a separate product.  

iii.  ATS or power transfer from primary source of power to alternate source of power 
to the fire pump shall be essentially located inside the pump room, at or near the 
fire pump controller. 

iv.  Where dedicated ATS is provided, it shall be approved and listed for the fire con-

troller. 

v.  The power transfer switch shall not have short circuit or overcurrent protection as 

part of the switching mechanism of the transfer switch. 

vi.  A means to prevent the sending of the signal for starting of the alternate source 
generator when commanded by the ATS, if the alternate isolating switch or the 
alternate circuit breaker is in the open or tripped position. 

vii. The (ATS) power transfer switch shall be electrically operated and mechanically 

held. 

viii. The power transfer switch shall be suitable for the available short-circuit currents 

at the transfer switch normal and alternate input terminals. 

ix.  The power transfer switch shall have an ampere rating not less than 115 percent of 

the motor full-load current and also be suitable for switching the motor locked 
rotor current. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 571 of 1348 

 

 

 

Figure 9.2.: Various ATS arrangements 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 572 of 1348 
 

 

 

Figure 9.2b.: Typical Power Supply Arrangement from Power Source to Fire Pump Motor 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 573 of 1348 

 
 

Table 9.3.a.: Pipe Sizes Connecting to Centrifugal Fire Pump 

PUMP 
RATING 

SUCTION  DIS-

CHARGE 

RELIEF 
VALVE 

METER 
DEVICE 

RELIEF 
VALVE 
DIS-
CHARGE 

NUMBER/ 
SIZE OF 
HOSE 
VALVES 

HOSE 
HEADER 
SUPPLY 

50 gpm 

38mm  (11/2”)  32mm (11/4”)  32mm (11/4”)  38mm (11/2”)  50mm  (2”) 

1-25mm (1”) 

38mm 
(11/2”) 

100 gpm 

50mm  (2”) 

50mm  (2”) 

38mm (11/2”)  50mm  (2”) 

65mm(21/2”)  1-38mm(11/2”)  65mm
(21/2”) 

150 gpm 

65mm (21/2”)  65mm(21/2”)  50mm  (2”)  65mm(21/2”)  75mm (3”) 

200 gpm 

75mm (3”) 

75mm (3”) 

50mm  (2”)  65mm(21/2”)  75mm (3”) 

1-65mm(21/2”)  65mm
(21/2”) 

1-65mm(21/2”)  65mm
(21/2”) 

250 gpm 

85mm (3 1/2”)  75mm (3”) 

50mm  (2”)  65mm(21/2”)  85mm (31/2”)  1-65mm(21/2”)  75mm 

(3”) 

300 gpm 

100mm (4”)  100mm (4”)  65mm(21/2”)  85mm (31/2”)  85mm (31/2”)  1-65mm(21/2”)  75mm 

(3”) 

400 gpm 

100mm (4”)  100mm (4”)  75mm (3”) 

125mm (5”)  100mm (4”) 

2-65mm(21/2”)  100mm 

(4”) 

450 gpm 

125mm (5”)  125mm (5”)  75mm (3”) 

125mm (5”)  100mm (4”) 

2-65mm(21/2”)  100mm 

(4”) 

500 gpm 

125mm (5”)  125mm (5”)  75mm (3”) 

125mm (5”)  125mm (5”) 

2-65mm(21/2”)  100mm 

(4”) 

750 gpm 

150mm (6”)  150mm (6”)  100mm (4”)  150mm (6”)  125mm (5”) 

3-65mm(21/2”)  150mm 

(6”) 

1000 gpm  200mm (8”)  150mm (6”)  100mm (4”)  200mm (8”)  150mm (6”) 

4-65mm(21/2”)  150mm 

(6”) 

1250 gpm  200mm (8”)  200mm (8”)  150mm (6”)  200mm (8”)  150mm (6”) 

6-65mm(21/2”)  200mm 

(8”) 

1500 gpm  200mm (8”)  200mm (8”)  150mm (6”)  200mm (8”)  200mm (8”) 

6-65mm(21/2”)  200mm 

(8”) 

2000 gpm  250mm (10”)  250mm (10”)  150mm (6”)  250mm (10”)  200mm (8”) 

6-65mm(21/2”)  200mm 

(8”) 

2500 gpm  250mm (10”)  250mm (10”)  150mm (6”)  250mm (10”)  200mm (8”) 

8-65mm(21/2”)  250mm 

3000 gpm  300mm (12”)  300mm (12”)  200mm (8”)  300mm (12”)  200mm (8”) 

12-65mm
(21/2”) 

3500 gpm  300mm (12”)  300mm (12”)  200mm (8”)  300mm (12”)  250mm (10”)  12-65mm

(21/2”) 

4000 gpm  350mm (14”)  300mm (12”)  200mm (8”)  350mm (14”)  250mm (10”)  16-65mm

(21/2”) 

4500 gpm  400mm (16”)  350mm (14”)  200mm (8”)  350mm (14”)  250mm (10”)  16-65mm

(21/2”) 

5000 gpm  400mm (16”)  350mm (14”)  200mm (8”)  350mm (14”)  250mm (10”)  20-65mm

(21/2”) 

 

(10”) 

250mm 
(10”) 

300mm 
(12”) 

300mm 
(12”) 

300mm 
(12”) 

300mm 
(12”) 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 574 of 1348 

Table 9.3: General Requirements of Water based Fire Protection Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

9. ISOLATION 

OR        
SECTION 
CONTROL 
VALVES 

i.  All the isolation and section control valves installed in the sprinkler system shall be  
supervised O.S. & Y gate valve or supervised butterfly valves installed with a tamper 
or supervisory switch connected to the building fire alarm system for monitoring or 
secured in open position by a padlock or riveted strap unless other wise specified 
and approved by the Civil Defence. 

ii.  All isolating valves installed in sprinkler system shall be so constructed that in order 

to shut the valve the spindle must turn clockwise. The hand wheels of all stop 
valves shall be clearly marked to indicate which direction the wheel is to be turned 
to close the valve. 

iii.  An indication showing whether the valve is open or shut shall also be provided. 
iv.  An isolation valves shall be installed in each sprinkler riser on upstream side of an 
alarm check valve such that the isolation of single sprinkler riser will not interrupt 
the water supply to other sprinkler risers from the same source of supply. 

v.  The valve on downstream side of the flow meter in the fire pump test line shall be a 

globe type valve for the ease of throttling. 

vi.  The valves of the suction side of fire pumps and water tank outlets shall be O.S.&Y 

type gate valve only. 

vii.  All the valves shall be rated for the system working pressure and water tempera-

ture service and approved by the Civil Defence department. 

viii. All the isolation / section or floor control valves shall be installed in an easily acces-

sible & visible locations. 

ix.  Isolation and control valves shall be provided with an identification sign board in a 

visible location in both Arabic & English. 

x.  Where isolation / control valves are located in a closed room or shaft, access door 

or panel shall be provided with an identification sign board in visible location in 
both Arabic & English. 

xi.  All the valves shall be rated for the system working pressure and water tempera-

ture service, approved by Civil Defence as per Section 6. of this chapter. 

i.  All the check valves shall be installed in easily accessible & visible locations. 
ii. 

 Where there is more than one source of water supply, a check valve shall be in-
stalled in each connection.  

iii.  Where sprinklers are installed on two adjacent sides of a building, protecting 

against two separate and distinct exposures, with separate control valves for each 
side, the end lines shall be connected with check valves located so that one sprin-
kler around the corner will operate. The intermediate pipe between the two check 
valves shall be arranged to drain.  

iv.  A listed backflow prevention device shall be considered a check valve, and an addi-

tional check valve shall not be required. 

v.  Where cushion tanks are used with automatic fire pumps, no check valve is re-

quired in the cushion tank connection. 

vi.  Check valves shall be installed in a vertical or horizontal position in accordance with 

their listing. 

vii.  Where a single wet pipe sprinkler system is equipped with a fire department con-

nection, the alarm valve is considered a check valve, and an additional check valve 
shall not be required. 

viii. Check valves shall be approved by Civil Defence as per Section 6. of this chapter. 

10. CHECK 
VALVE 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 575 of 1348 

 
 

Table 9.3: General Requirements of Water based Fire Protection Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

11. VALVE       

SUPERVISION 

i.  Valves on connections to water supplies, sectional control and isolation valves, 
and other valves in supply pipes to sprinklers and other fixed water-based fire 
suppression systems shall be supervised by one of the following methods:                            
a. Central station, proprietary, or remote station signalling service                             
b. Local signalling service that will cause the sounding of an audible signal at a 
constantly attended point                                                                                                           
c. Valves locked in the correct position                                                                             
d. Valves located within fenced enclosures under the control of the owner, 
sealed in the open position, and inspected weekly as part of an approved proce-
dure 

12. PRESSURE 

i.  Pressure gauges with a control valve (gauge cock) having drain arrangement 

GAUGE 

shall be installed on the upstream and downstream side of alarm check valves to 
read supply and system pressures. 

ii.  Pressure gauges shall be installed on top of each sprinkler riser and in each zone 

13. BREECHING  

INLET 

control valve assembly. 

iii.  The pressure gauges shall be rated for the system working pressure and water 
temperature service and approved by the Civil Defence department as per Sec-
tion 6. of this chapter. 

iv.  The maximum reading of the scale shall be 150% of the maximum system pres-

sure and each scale shall have divisions not exceeding 0.2bar. 

v.  All the pressure gauges shall be filled with glycerin liquid to prevent damage of 

their needles due to the system water pressure surge.  

i.  A breeching inlet shall be provided for the building active systems. 
ii.  A separate dedicated breeching inlet, located within 18 m of fire truck parking,  
shall be provided directly to fire water tank to refill directly by the Civil Defence 
fire trucks. A signage “FIRE WATER TANK DIRECT REFILLING” shall be provided 
for such a breeching inlet. 

iii.  See Chapter 2, Section 2.10.2. for signage. Signage shall clearly distinguish the 
set feeding the building active systems and the one feeding directly fire water 
tank. 

iv.  A breeching inlet shall be instantaneous male coupling inlets, located at the Fire 

Access level for Civil Defence. Civil Defence breeching inlets shall be located in 
an easily accessible and visible location, especially at the front side of the build-
ings, within 18 meters from the Civil Defence vehicle approach road.  

v.  There shall be no shutoff valve in the fire department connection.  
vi.  Fire department connections shall be located not less than 457 mm nor more 

than 1219 mm above the finished ground level. 

vii.  Breeching inlets shall be equipped with caps to protect the system from the en-

try of dust and debris. 

14. HOSE       
CABINET 

i.  Hose cabinet shall be of a size sufficient to accommodate the corresponding pip-

ing, landing valve, hose, nozzle and extinguishers. 

ii.  Within the cabinet, installation shall be such that there is 25.4 mm space be-

tween any part of the cabinet and landing valve handle, either in closed position 
or open position. 

iii.  Where a fire resistance rated construction is penetrated by a hose cabinet, es-
pecially at fire resistance rated corridors, such fire-resistance rating of the wall 
construction shall be maintained by a fire-resistance rated cabinet and installa-
tion. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 576 of 1348 

Table 9.3: General Requirements of Water based Fire Protection Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

15. HOSE               

iv.   Fire Hose Cabinets shall be located next to the exit doors at ground floor and exit 

CABINET 

stair door at typical floors, in the exit corridor in each floor of the building. 

v.    Where Horizontal Exit is provided in a building, Fire Hose Cabinets shall be in-

stalled on both sides of such horizontal exits. 

vi.   The fire hose cabinet shall not be more than 6 m away from the exit stair door. 
        Additional Fire Hose Cabinets shall be installed in exit corridors of each floor 

such that any part of the building, in each floor is within 30 m from the Fire Hose 
Cabinet. 

vii.  The hose Cabinet shall have signage both in Arabic and English, clearly identifying 

the class of the hose connection. 

16. HOSE 

i.  The hose diameter shall be of size as required by other sections of this chapter as 

per the Hose System classification (Class I, Class II and Class III). 

ii.  The hose length shall be 30 m long, approved and listed by Civil Defence as per 

material test standards mentioned in Section 6. of this chapter. 

17. NOZZLE 

i.  The hose Nozzle diameter shall be of the size as required by other sections of this 

chapter as per the Hose System classification (Class I, Class II and Class III) and 
approved and listed by Civil Defence as per the material test standards men-
tioned in Section 6. of this chapter. 

18. PROTECTION 

i.  Dry & wet riser piping in any building, shall be installed within a protected enclo-

sure having fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours.  

ii.  If the building is fully protected by an automatic sprinkler system, the protection 

of horizontal branches and mains shall not be required. 

19. PAINT     

COLOR 

i.  All steel pipes & fittings used for fire fighting service shall be painted in red color. 
ii.  There shall be directional arrow marks to indicate the direction of water flow in 

the system. See Figure 9.3. 

20. INSTALLER 
QUALIFICA-
TIONS 

i.  The installation of fire protection systems shall be carried out only by Civil De-

fence approved and registered “Fire Protection Contractors”. 

ii.  The installation personnel shall be qualified or shall be supervised by persons who 
are qualified in the installation, inspection and testing of fire protection systems.  
iii. Each installer shall have a Civil Defence’ valid license, which is issued upon his suc-

cessful passing of Civil Defence qualification examinations. 

iv. Qualifications or certification of the personnel and Civil Defence license shall be 

produced at any time when requested by the Civil Defence Authorities.   

 
 

 

Figure 9.3.: Fire Water Flow Directional Signs 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 577 of 1348 

3.2.  Dry Riser Systems 
 

3.2.1. 

 The requirements for Dry Riser System Material, design, installation shall be as per 
Table 9.4. and the General Requirements of Table 9.3.   

 

Table 9.4: Dry Riser System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. DEFINITION 

i.  Dry riser systems are normally dry without a permanent fire pump or water con-
nection to it and depend on the Civil Defence fire truck to pump water into the 
system. Dry riser system comprises of one or multiple vertical riser pipes or hori-
zontal runs of piping that are terminated to the two way breeching inlets locat-
ed at ground level and connected to the 65mm diameter landing (Fire Depart-
ment) valve outlets coupled or uncoupled with 65mm diameter, 30 m long, Civil 
Defence approved hose with multipurpose hose nozzle that are placed inside a 
cabinet for the use of Civil Defence Department personnel or other trained fire 
fighting personnel.  

2. COMPONENTS 

i.  Pipes, fittings, landing valve, hose cabinet, hose , nozzle, breeching inlet and 

signs. 

3. PIPE SIZES 

i.  The minimum pipe size for serving a single 65 mm diameter hose valve shall be 

not less than 65 mm in diameter and the pipe line serving two or more hose 
valves shall be not less than 100 mm diameter.  

ii.  Minimum wall thickness shall be as per schedule 40. 

4. FITTINGS 

i.  Fittings shall comply to Table 9.3.7. 

5. LANDING 

i.  Landing Valves shall be Class I, 65 mm, instantaneous connection outlet, ap-

VALVE 

proved and listed by Civil Defence as per tests mentioned in Section 6. of this 
chapter. 

ii.  The installation of the landing valve shall be such that it is easily accessible and 

operable. 

iii. The landing valve shall be installed at a height of not less than 900  mm and not 

more than 1200 mm from the finished floor level. 

6. FLOW AND           

i.  Landing valves, piping, fittings, breeching inlet and connections shall designed to 

PRESSURE 

withstand 250 gpm at 6.9 bar. 

ii.  If the residual pressure exceeds 7 bar at the fire hose connection, an approved 

pressure reducing valve shall be introduced to restrict the pressure to 7 bar.  

7. HOSE 

i.  Hose shall be 65 mm, 30 m long, approved and listed by Civil Defence as per 

material test standards mentioned in Section 6. of this chapter. 

8. HOSE CABINET 

i.  The hose Cabinet shall comply to Table 9.3.14. 

9. NOZZLE 

i.  The nozzle shall comply to Table 9.3.17. 

10. SIGNAGE 

i.  The hose Cabinet shall have signage both in Arabic and English, clearly identify-

ing the class and type of the hose connection as “Dry Riser System” 

11. LOCATION 

i.  The hose Cabinet location shall comply to Table 9.3.14. 

12. BREECHING 

INLET 

i.  The dry riser stand pipe system shall be terminated to a 2-way breeching inlet 
connection having 100 mm diameter flanged outlet with 2 no's of 65 mm diam-
eter instantaneous male coupling inlets 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 578 of 1348 

 

 

Figure 9.4.: Dry Landing valve riser with Hose reel System 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 579 of 1348 

3.3.  Hose Reel Systems 

 
3.2.1. 

 

 

 The requirements for Hose Reel System material, design, installation shall be as 
per Table 9.5. and the General Requirements of Table 9.3.   

Table 9.5: Fire Hose Reel System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. DEFINITION 

i.  Fire hose reel systems are Class II systems, pressurized with water having a per-

manent water supply from fire water pumps and fire water storage tanks. The fire 
hose reel system comprises of one or multiple vertical riser pipes or horizontal 
runs of piping that are connected to the 25 mm diameter outlet valve, 30 m long 
re-in forced rubber lined (RRL) hose with hose nozzle that are placed inside the 
fire hose cabinet for the use of trained fire fighting personnel or by occupants as 
first response if it is safe to do so. 

ii.  Fire hose rack systems are class II systems, pressurized with water having perma-
nent water supply from fire water pumps and fire water storage tanks. Fire hose 
rack system comprises of one or multiple vertical riser pipes or horizontal runs of 
piping that are connected to the 40 mm diameter outlet valve, 30 m long fire 
hose, folded vertically and attached over the pins in an approved manner. The 
system is for the use of trained fire fighting personnel or by occupants as first re-
sponse if it is safe to do so. 

2. COMPONENTS 

i.  Fire Pumps, Controller, Fire Water Tank, Pipes, Fittings, outlet valve, Hose Cabi-

net, Hose Reel/Hose Rack , Nozzle, Breeching inlet and Signs. 

3. FIRE PUMP 
CAPACITY 

i.  The fire pump set shall consist of 1 Electric driven pump and 1 diesel driven pump 

complete with controllers. 

ii.  Pump capacities shall comply with Section 4. in accordance with the occupancy 

4. PIPES 

type. 

iii. Pump pressure shall be such that the most remote Hose Reel or Hose Rack pres-

sure shall not be less than 4.5 bar. 

i.  The minimum pipe size for serving a single fire hose reel shall not be less than 25 
mm diameter, and serving single hose rack shall not be less than 40 mm and the 
pipe line serving two or more hose connections shall not be less than 50 mm in 
diameter. 

ii.  The minimum wall thickness shall be as per schedule 40. 
iii. Pipes shall be rated a for working pressure of 4.5 bar at the most remote point of 

the piping network. 

5. FITTINGS 

i.  Fittings shall be rated for working pressure of 4.5 bar at the most remote point of 

the piping network. 

6. VALVE OUTLET  i.  The Valve outlet shall be 25 mm for the hose Reel System. 
ii.  The valve outlet shall be 40 mm for the hose Rack System. 

7. HOSE 

i.  The hose for the hose reel system shall be 25 mm in diameter, 30 m long re-

inforced rubber lined (RRL) hose with hose nozzle , wrapped on a rotating drum. 

ii.  The hose for the hose rack system shall be 40 mm in diameter, 30 m long fire 

hose, folded vertically. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 580 of 1348 

 

Table 9.5: Fire Hose Reel System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

8. HOSE CABINET 

i.  The hose cabinet shall comply with Table 9.3.14. 

9. NOZZLE 

i.  The nozzle shall comply to Table 9.3.17. 

10. SIGNAGE 

i.  The hose Cabinet shall have a signage both in Arabic and English, clearly identify-

ing the class and type of the hose connection as “Fire Hose Reel/Rack System” 

11. LOCATION 

i.  The hose Cabinet location shall comply with Table 9.3.12. 

12. FIRE WATER 

i.  Fire water tanks shall comply with Table 9.3.4., with the duration as per Section 

TANK. 

4. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Figure 9.5.a.: Typical Class III Wet Hose Reel 

Figure 9.5.b.: Typical Dry landing valve with wet Hose Reel 

3.2.2.  Generally, the fire hose reel/rack system is accompanied by a dry riser system, 

where the hose cabinet houses both hose reel/racks and landing valves as shown 
below.  Such systems shall comply both with Section 3.2. and Section 3.3..  

Figure 9.5.c.: Class II Hose Reel Tapping without landing valve 

Figure 9.6.: Typical Combined Hose Cabinet 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 581 of 1348 

3.4.  Wet Riser Systems 

 
3.4.1. 

 The requirements for the Wet Riser System material, design, installation shall be 
as per Table 9.6. and the General Requirements of Table 9.3.   

Table 9.6: Wet Riser System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. DEFINITION 

i.  Wet riser systems are pressurized with water having a permanent water supply 
from fire water pumps and fire water storage tanks. The wet riser system com-
prises of one or multiple vertical riser pipes or horizontal runs of piping that feed 
the Landing Valve connections. These risers are connected to fire pumps and fire 
water storage tanks located within the buildings. A 25mm diameter for Hose Reel 
System OR 40 mm diameter for Hose Rack system AND, 65 mm diameter for the 
landing Valve tapping will be made from the wet riser in each floor level and 
fitted with multipurpose hoses and nozzles that are placed inside a cabinet, 
known as Class III hose systems, for the use of the Civil Defence department per-
sonnel or other trained fire fighting personnel. In addition four way breeching 
inlets located at a ground level are connected to the bottom of the wet riser to 
pump water from the Civil Defence fire truck as supplementary water supply. 

2. COMPONENTS 

i.  Fire Pumps, Controller, Fire Water Tank, Pipes, Fittings, Hose connection valve, 

Landing Valve, Hose Cabinet, Hose Reel/Hose Rack , Hose, Nozzle, Breeching inlet 
and Signs. 

3. FIRE PUMP 
CAPACITY 

i.  The fire pump set shall consist of 1 Electric driven pump, 1 diesel driven pump 

and 1 electric Jockey pump, complete with controllers. 

ii.  The fire Pump capacities shall comply with Section 4. 
iii. Pump pressure shall be such that the most remote landing valve pressure shall 

not be less than 6.9 bar. 

4. PIPES 

i.  The minimum pipe size for serving a single 65 mm diameter hose valve shall be 

not less than 65 mm in diameter and the pipe line serving two or more hose 
valves shall be not less than 100 mm diameter.  

ii.  The minimum wall thickness shall be as per schedule 40. 
iii. Pipes shall be rated for working pressure of 6.9 bar at the most remote point of 

the piping network. 

iv. 25 mm Hose reel or 40 mm Hose rack and 65 mm Landing valve tapping shall be 

made from the same wet riser. 

5. FITTINGS 

i.  Fittings shall be rated for a working pressure of 6.9 bar at the most remote point 

of the piping network. 

6. HYDRAULIC 

i.  The hydraulic calculation shall be performed using the Civil Defence listed and 

CALCULA-
TIONS 

approved software based on the following criteria.                                                                                       
a. Two numbers of landing valves on top most point of the hydraulically most 
unfavorable wet riser providing 250 gpm flow at 7 bar per outlet and one Land-
ing valve outlet on the topmost point of the adjacent wet risers providing 250 
gpm flow at 7 bar per outlet. 

ii.  If a horizontal wet riser system provides supply for 3 or more landing valve out-
lets in a floor, the hydraulic calculation shall be based on 3 numbers of landing 
valve at remotest point of the  hydraulically most unfavorable wet riser pipe 
providing 250 gpm flow at 7 bar per outlet and one landing valve outlet at the 
topmost point of each adjacent wet riser pipes providing 250 gpm flow at 7 bar 
per outlet. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 582 of 1348 

Table 9.6: Wet Riser System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

7. VALVE  OUTLET 

i.  The valve outlet shall be 25 mm for the hose Reel System. 
ii.  The  valve outlet shall be 40 mm for the hose Rack System. 
iii. The valve outlet shall be 65 mm for the landing Valve. 

8. HOSE 

i.  The hose for the hose reel system shall be 25 mm diameter, 30 m long with a 

hose nozzle , wrapped on a rotating drum. 

ii.  The hose for the hose rack system shall be 40 mm diameter outlet valve, 30 m 

long fire hose, folded vertically. 

iii. The hose for landing valve shall be 65 mm in diameter and 30 m long re-inforced 

rubber lined (RRL) hose with multipurpose nozzle. 

9. LOCATION 

i.  Fire Hose Cabinets (FHC) shall be within 6 m from Exit Stair door. FHC shall not 
be located inside the stair core. Installation of landing valve alone in the stair is 
not permitted as an alternative to the fire hose cabinet.  

ii.  Fire Hose Cabinets shall consist of the following. 
a.  65 mm Landing Valve  outlet. 
b.  40/25 mm outlet with Hose Reel/Hose Rack. 
c.  CO2 Fire Extinguisher.  
d.  Dry Chemical Powder Fire Extinguisher. 
e.  65mm, 30 m Fire Hose with  nozzle. 
iii.  The hose Cabinet location shall comply with Table 9.3.14. See Figure 9.7. 

 

 

 

Figure 9.7.: Hose Cabinet Locations  

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 583 of 1348 

Table 9.6: Wet Riser System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

10. NOZZLE 

i.  The nozzle shall comply with Table 9.3.17. 

11. SIGNAGE 

i.  The hose Cabinet shall have signage both in Arabic and English, clearly identify-
ing the class and type of the hose connection as “Fire Hose Reel/Rack System” 

12. BREECHING 

i.  A 4-way breeching inlet connection having 150 mm diameter flanged outlet with 

INLET 

4 no's of 65 mm diameter instantaneous male coupling inlets shall be provid-
ed. 

ii.  Breeching inlets shall also comply with requirements of Table 9.3.13. 

13. ZONING OF  
WET RISERS 
(MULTI-
LEVELS) 

i.  The maximum pressure anywhere  in the wet riser system shall not exceed 24 
bar with a fire pump set to cut-off at 140% of the rated operational pressure. 
ii.  Where multiple wet risers are provided in other than Lowrise buildings, they 

shall be interconnected at the highest level they are serving. 

14. TEST RISERS 
AND DRAINS 

iii. The vertical wet riser system pressure exceeds 12 bar with a fire pump set to cut

-off at 140% of the rated operational pressure., or when most remote landing 
valve is located at a height 45 m from the fire pump location, the risers shall be 
zoned into “High Zone” and “Low Zone” with looping as shown in Figure 9.8.B. 
iv. When the vertical wet riser system pressure exceeds 24 bar with fire pump set 
to cut-off at 140% of the rated operational pressure., or when the most remote 
landing valve is located at a height of 90 m from the fire pump location, the se-
cond set of fire pumps and dedicated water tanks shall be provided to feed such 
wet risers from that level. See Figure 9.9.A. and Figure 9.9.B. for illustration. 

i.  Each wet riser shall have drainage arrangement, at least on every alternative 

floors. 

ii.  Drain risers shall be fitted with 65 mm diameter instantaneous male coupling 

with a built-in spring loaded non return valve with a blank cap beside each land-
ing valve outlet to facilitate the landing valve test during the routine testing.  

iii. The drain riser shall be terminated back to the fire water tank or to open drain. 
iv. Each wet riser shall be provided with drain arrangements having not less than 50 

mm diameter on the down stream side of the riser isolation valve and where 
ever the riser pipe changes its direction which leaves water trapped in those  
sections. 

15. FIRE WATER 

i.  Fire water tanks shall comply with Table 9.3.3., with duration as per Section 4. 

TANK. 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 584 of 1348 
 

 

 

Figure 9.8.:A.: Typical Wet Riser System  

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 585 of 1348 
 

 

 

Figure 9.8.B.: Typical Wet Riser System with High Zone and Low 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 586 of 1348 

 

Figure 9.9.A.: Multi-level pump and water tank for Wet Riser System 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 587 of 1348 
 

 

 

Figure 9.9.B.: Multi-level pump and water tank for Wet Riser System 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 588 of 1348 

3.5.  Automatic Wet Sprinkler Systems 

 
3.5.1. 

 

 

 The requirements for Automatic Sprinkler System material, design, installation 
shall be as per Table 9.7. and the General Requirements of Table 9.3.   

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. DEFINITION 

i.  Automatic sprinkler heads are individually heat activated and fixed into a piping 
network with water under pressure. When the heat of a fire raises the sprinkler 
temperature to its operating point, (a variety of temperature ratings, from 57 to 
260 degrees) a liquid- filled glass bulb will shatter or a solder link will melt to 
open that single sprinkler, allowing water to discharge. The water is directed 
onto a diffuser or deflector which is designed to not only break the water into 
droplets of a specific size, but also to direct the spray to cover a specific floor 
and wall area. 

2. COMPONENTS 

i.  The Fire Pumps, Controller, Fire Water Tank, Pipes, Fittings,  Sprinkler Heads, 

Isolation valves, Alarm Check valves (ACV), Floor Zone Control Valve (ZCV), Pres-
sure gauge, Flow Switch, Test connection, Drains, Breeching inlet and Signs. 

3. FIRE PUMP   

CAPACITY 

4. PIPES 

i.  The Fire Pump set shall consist of 1 Electric driven pump, 1 diesel driven pump 

and 1 electric Jockey pump, complete with controllers. 

ii.  The Pump capacity shall be as per Section 4. 

i.  Pipe sizes for the automatic sprinkler System shall be established using Hydrau-
lic calculations but shall not be less than the minimum diameters mentioned in 
Table 9.7.A. 

ii.  However, the number of sprinklers shall be permitted to be increased when ac-

ceptable hydraulic calculations are performed and justified. 

iii. The minimum wall thickness shall be as per schedule 40. 
iv. Pipes shall be rated for a working pressure of 12 bar at the most remote point of 

the piping network. 

v.  The sprinkler Piping shall be dedicated, serving only a sprinkler system. 
vi. Sprinkler pipes shall be supported in such a way that it allows free movement 
due to the expansion and contraction and the supports shall be installed near 
the joints, elbows and tee branches as much as possible.  

vii. The required special expansion joints & expansion loops shall be provided to 

allow the free movement of the pipe installation due to the expansion and con-
traction of the building structure and of the piping. 

Table 9.7.A: Minimum Pipe Sizes and Maximum Number of Sprinkler allowed 

NOMINAL STEEL 
PIPE  DIAMETER 

MAXIMUM NUMBER OF 
SPRINKLERS IN LIGHT 
HAZARD 

MAXIMUM NUMBER OF 
SPRINKLERS IN             
ORDINARY AND STORAGE 
HAZARD 

MAXIMUM NUMBER OF 
SPRINKLERS IN ABOVE 
FALSE CEILING AND   BE-
LOW RAISED FLOOR 

1. 25 mm  

2. 32 mm  

3. 40 mm  

4. 50 mm  

5. 65 mm  

6. 80 mm  

7. 100 mm  

8. 150 mm  

 

2 

3 

5 

10 

30 

60 

100 

230 

2 

3 

5 

10 

20 

40 

100 

275 

2 

4 

7 

15 

30 

60 

100 

300 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 589 of 1348 

 

 

ITEMS 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

REQUIREMENTS 

5. FITTINGS 

i.  Fittings shall be rated for a working pressure of 12 bar at the most remote point 

of the piping network. 

6. SPRINKLERS 

i.  All sprinklers shall be permanently marked with a one- or two-character manu-
facturer symbol, followed by three or four numbers, so as to identify a unique 
sprinkler identification for every change in orifice size or shape, deflector charac-
teristic, pressure rating, and thermal sensitivity.  

ii.  Spare sprinklers not less than six numbers in quantity in each type & tempera-

ture range installed within the building shall be kept maintained in stock within 
the premises  

7. CORROSION 
RESISTANT 

i.  Listed corrosion-resistant sprinklers shall be installed in locations where chemi-

cals, moisture, or other corrosive vapors sufficient to cause corrosion of such 
devices exist. 

8. PAINT/  COLOR 

i.  Sprinklers shall not be painted unless they are listed and approved with paint 

from the manufacturer.  

9. COVER PLATES 

i.  Cover plates and Escutcheons used with recessed/flush-type or concealed sprin-

klers shall be part of the listed sprinkler assembly. 

10. K-FACTORS 

i.  Standard sprinklers shall have the thread size of not less than ½ in. (12.7 mm) 

NPT having nominal orifice size of ½ in. (12.7 mm) with K-factor 5.6 (Metric fac-
tor 80).  

ii.  Sprinklers having a K-factor exceeding K-5.6 (80) and having ½ in. (15 mm) NPT 

shall not be permitted to be installed in new sprinkler systems. 

iii. Where design density required is greater than 8.1 LPM/m2 (2.1 gpm/m2 ) but 

lesser than 13.9 LPM/m2 (3.7 gpm/m2 ), the sprinklers having K-factor 8.0 
(Metric factor K-116) shall be used.  

iv. If the required design density is greater than 13.9 LPM/m2 (3.7 GPM/m2), the 
sprinklers having K-factor 11.2 (Metric factor K-161) or higher shall be used as 
per the approval listing. 

11.  OPERATING 
PRESSURE 

i.  The minimum operating pressure of any sprinkler for determining the water 

supply requirements  shall be not less than 0.5 bar (7 psi) in the light hazard oc-
cupancy and 1.0 bar (14.5 psi) in the ordinary hazard occupancies. 

ii.  The maximum operating pressure in a sprinkler system shall not be more than 

12 bar.  

iii. Where a higher operating pressure is used for the sprinkler system, all the sprin-

klers, pipes and fittings shall be rated, approved and listed by Civil Defence for 
the higher operating pressure. However, the operating pressure shall not be 
more than 16 bar in any case. 

12.  PIPING 

i.  Pipe sizes for an automatic sprinkler system shall be established using Hydraulic 

calculations but shall not be less than the minimum diameters mentioned in          
Table 9.7.4. 

ii.  The minimum wall thickness shall be as per schedule 40. 
iii. The pipes shall be rated for a working pressure of 12 bar at the most remote 

point of the piping network. 

iv. Sprinkler Piping shall be dedicated, serving only sprinkler system. 
v.  It shall be permitted to provide minimum 25 mm (1 inch) outlets with hexagonal 

bushings to accommodate sprinklers attached directly to branch line fittings to 
allow for future system modifications. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 590 of 1348 

 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

13.  DESIGN        

i.  The water supply requirement for sprinklers only shall be calculated from the den-

DENSITY 

sity/area curves shown in Figure 9.10. 

ii.  The hand line hose stream water demand shall be added to the sprinkler water 

demand according to the type of proposed fire fighting hose system based on the 
occupancy classification. 

iii.  The calculations shall satisfy any single point on the appropriate density/area 

curve. 

iv. The design Density based on the Hazard categories and Density—Area curve on a 

single design point shall be as per Table 9.7.B. 

Table 9.7.B.: Design Densities based on Occupancy Hazard 

HAZARD 

DESIGN DENSITY         
(mm/min) gpm/ft2 
      

AREA OF OPERATION 
( m2 ) Ft2 

WATER DEMAND       
ONLY FOR SPRINKLERS 
gpm 

1. Light Hazard  

2. Ordinary 1 Hazard  

3. Ordinary 2 Hazard  

(4.1) 0.10  

(6.1) 0.15  

(8.1) 0.20  

4. Extra Hazard Group 1  

(12.2) 0.30  

5. Extra Hazard Group 2 

(16.3) 0.40  

(139) 1500 

(139) 1500 

(139) 1500 

(232) 2500 

(232) 2500 

150 

225 

300 

750 

1000 

 

Photo Caption 
 

 

Figure 9.10.: Density– Area Curves 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 591 of 1348 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

14. SPRINKLER   

OPERATING    
TEMPERATURE 

i.  The operating temperature of the proposed sprinklers shall be based on the 
maximum room temperature expected at the ceiling level at any time. Auto-
matic sprinklers shall have their frame arms, deflector, coating material, or liq-
uid bulb colored in accordance with the requirements of Table 9.7.C. 

ii.  The maximum temperature of water in the sprinkler piping shall not exceed 

37.8oC. 

iii. The minimum temperature of water in the sprinkler piping shall not drop be-

low 4oC. 

iv. For the air-conditioned areas, the operating temperature of the sprinkler shall 

be 68oC. 

v.  For the non air-conditioned areas, the operating temperature of the sprinkler 

shall be 79oC. 

Table 9.7.C: Sprinkler Operating Temperature and Color Classification 

MAXIMUM  CEILING           
TEMPERATURE 

TEMPERATURE 
RATING OF    
SPRINKLER HEAD 

TEMPERATURE            
CLASSIFICATION 

COLOUR CODE 

GLASS BULB  
COLOURS 

1. 38OC  

2. 66OC  

3. 107OC  

4. 149OC  

5. 191OC  

6. 246OC  

7. 329OC  

 

 

57OC—77OC  

79OC—107OC  

Ordinary 

Uncolored or Black 

Orange or Red 

Intermediate 

White 

Yellow or Green 

121OC—149OC  

High 

163OC—191OC  

Extra High 

Blue 

Red 

204OC—246OC  

260OC—302OC  

343OC  

Very Extra High 

Green 

Ultra High 

Ultra High 

Orange 

Orange 

Blue 

Purple 

Black 

Black 

Black 

Figure 9.11.: Sprinkler Bulb Color codes and Marking for illustration 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 592 of 1348 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

15. INSPECTOR 

i.  An approved alarm test valve shall be provided in each sectional or floor zone con-

TEST 
VALVE 

trol valve assembly on the downstream side of the water flow switch. The test valve 
shall be not less than 25 mm of diameter in size and shall have an orifice diameter 
to give a flow equal to or less than one sprinkler of a type having the smallest ori-
fice installed on the particular system to test each water flow alarm device for each 
system.  

ii.  The inspectors test valve shall be located at an easily accessible & visible location 

with an identification sign board in a visible location in both Arabic & English. 

iii. Where the test valve is located in a closed room, shaft access door or panel, it shall 

be provided with an identification sign board in a visible location in both Arabic & 
English. 

16. DRAINS 

i.  The complete sprinkler system piping shall be designed and installed in such a way 

that the entire water can be drained. 

ii.  A main drain valve shall be installed on each sprinkler system main riser on the 

down stream side of an Alarm Check valve. The system main drain valve can be a 
part of an alarm check valve.  

iii. The size of the main drain valve (alarm check valve) shall not be less than 50mm in  
diameter. Auxiliary drains shall be provided where a change in piping direction pre-
vents the drainage of the system piping through the main drain valve. 

iv. In addition, where the sectional zone or floor control valve is provided, it shall be 
equipped with a drain connection having a minimum size not less than 25 mm in 
diameter to drain that portion of the system controlled by the sectional valve. A 
listed and approved combined test & drain valve is permitted to be used in the sec-
tional or floor zone control valve assembly.  

v.  The main sprinkler riser drain should discharge to an open drain outside the build-

ing at a point free from the possibility of causing water damage. Where it is not 
possible to discharge the building wall outside, the drain should be piped to a 
sump, which in turn should discharge by gravity or be pumped to a waste water 
drain or sewer. The main sprinkler riser drain connection should be of a size suffi-
cient to carry off water from the fully open drain valve while it is discharging under 
normal water system pressures. Where this is not possible, a supplementary drain 
of equal size should be provided for test purposes with free discharge, located at or 
above grade. 

vi. The drain riser may be permitted to terminate back to the fire water tank if the 
tanks do not serves for domestic use. In such case, the drain discharge shall con-
form to any health or water department regulations.  

 

 

Figure 9.12.: Acceptable and unacceptable Pressure gauge location 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 593 of 1348 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

17. ALARM 
CHECK 
VALVE 

i.  An Alarm check valve assembly shall be installed in each sprinkler system riser as 
per the maximum sprinkler protection zone area limitations as per Table 9.7.17.ii, 
which shall consists of the following equipment and accessories.                                                                   
a. An alarm check Valve complete with trim kits & retarding device.                               
b. A water Motor Alarm Gong.                                                                                               
c. An electric Alarm pressure switch.                                                                                        
d. Pressure Gauges (Upstream & Down stream) 

ii.  Maximum sprinkler zone limitation                                                                                                       

a. Light Hazard—4831 m2                                                                                                                                                                          
b. Ordinary Group 1—4831 m2                                                                                                                
c. Ordinary Group 2—4831 m2                                                                                                               
d. Extra Hazard Group 1– 3716 m2                                                                                                         
e. Extra Hazard Group 2– 3716 m2 

iii. The alarm valve shall be installed in each sprinkler system supply risers complete 

with the required trims in all sprinkler system installations.  

iv. The Alarm valve trims shall consist of a basic trim with all the required pipes, 

fitting & valves, water motor alarm gong, retard chamber, electric alarm pressure 
switch, upstream & down stream pressure gauges etc.  

v.  The alarm pressure switch shall be interconnected with the building fire alarm sys-

tem to activate the fire alarm. 

vi. A 20 mm diameter by pass line shall be provided connecting the upstream and 
downstream side of the alarm check to allow the water pressure surge with out 
lifting the valve clapper off its seat, which will prevent the false alarm. 

vii. Alarm check valves shall be rated for the system working pressure and water tem-

perature service and approved by the Civil Defence department. 

viii.All the check valves shall be installed in easily accessible & visible locations.  
ix. Alarm check valves shall be installed vertically with an adequate clearance space 

around it for testing and maintenance purposes. 

x.  Retarding device shall be installed in the alarm line to prevent the false alarm due 

to the water pressure fluctuation in the sprinkler system. 

xi. The alarm check valve shall be approved and listed with the Civil Defence as per 

test standards of Section 6. 

 
 

 

Figure 9.13.: Alarm Check Valve  

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 594 of 1348 

 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

18. WATER     

MOTOR 
ALARM 
GONG 

i.  The sprinkler system shall be fitted with an approved water motor alarm, which 
shall be located at a distance not exceeding 25 m from the alarm valve, and at a 
height not to exceed 6m above the alarm valve. 

ii.  The used pipe work and fittings used shall be galvanized and to the sizes deter-

mined by the manufacturers data sheet. 

iii. The pipe work shall be arranged to drain through a fitting having an orifice not 
exceeding 3 mm in diameter. The orifice plate may form an integral part of the 
fitting but shall be manufactured from a non-ferrous material to prevent the hole 
from becoming blocked by corrosion or foreign matter. 

iv. A 15 mm test valve shall be installed on the installation side of each alarm valve. 
v.  Approved identification signs, shall be provided for the outside alarm devices. The 
sign should be located near the device in a conspicuous position and should be in 
English and Arabic. 

i.  Electric alarm pressure switches shall be installed in the system and they shall be 

mounted on a vertical branch pipe at least 300 mm long. 

ii.  The pressure switch may be of diaphragm bellows or bourdon tube operated type, 

and shall be sufficiently sensitive to operate when only one sprinkler is discharg-
ing.  

iii. The pressure switch shall be provided with volt free contracts to interconnect with 

the building fire alarm system for monitoring. 

iv. The pressure switch shall be rated for the system working pressure and water 

temperature service and approved by the Civil Defence department. 

19. ELECTRIC 
ALARM   
PRESSURE 
SWITCH 

 

 

Figure 9.14.: Water Motor Gong Connection 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 595 of 1348 

 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

20. CONTROL 

i.  Each sprinkler system shall be provided with a listed indicating valve in an accessi-

VALVES 

ble location, so located as to control all automatic sources of water supply. 

ii.  At least one listed indicating valve shall be installed in each source of water supply 
but not for fire department connections. There shall be no shutoff valve in the fire 
department connection. 

 

Figure 9.15.: Acceptable Isolation Valve arrangements 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 596 of 1348 

 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

21. PRESSURE      

i.  In portions of systems where all components are not listed for pressure greater 

REDUCING 
VALVE        
(PRV STATION) 

than 12.1 bar and the potential exists for normal (non-fire condition) water 
pressure in excess of 12.1 bar, a listed pressure-reducing valve shall be installed 
and set for an outlet pressure not exceeding 11 bar at the maximum inlet pres-
sure. 

ii.  Pressure gauges shall be installed on the inlet and outlet sides of each pressure-

reducing valve. 

iii. A relief valve of not less than 13 mm in size shall be provided on the discharge 
side of the pressure-reducing valve set to operate at a pressure not exceeding 
12.1 bar. 

iv. A listed indicating valve shall be provided on the inlet side of each pressure-
reducing valve, unless the pressure-reducing valve meets the listing require-
ments for use as an indicating valve. 

v.  Means shall be provided downstream of all pressure-reducing valves for flow 

tests at sprinkler system demand. 

vi. Pressure reducing valve shall be a valve station in an assembly with redundan-

cy.  

vii. Pressure relief valve shall not be used as pressure reducing valve. 

 

 

Figure 9.16.: Pressure Reducing Station 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 597 of 1348 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

22. SECTION OR 

i.  A sectional or floor zone control valve (ZCV) assembly shall be installed where the 

FLOOR 
ZONE    
CONTROL 
VALVE (ZCV) 

tapping is taken from the sprinkler riser for each floor in multi-story buildings. 

ii.  All Highrise buildings shall be provided with a motorized Zone Control Valve, su-

pervised by a zone control valve control panel for annunciation and manual opera-
tion by Civil Defence, to control, activate or de-activate the desired floor sprinkler. 
The zone control valve control panel shall be located at the Fire Command Center, 
next to the main Fire detection and Alarm control panel or at the fire pump room. 
iii. ZCV shall have supervised Butterfly valve, fitted with an indicator showing “OPEN” 

and “CLOSE” positions, and complete with padlocked securing straps. The valve 
shall be mounted on the upstream side of the flow switch. 

iv. ZCV shall have a water flow alarm switch having paddle type water flow detector 

suitable for the size of the pipe in which it is installed shall be fixed after the 
butterfly valve, on the main supply pipe and before any sprinkler connection is 
taken off. 

v.  ZCV shall have an inspector test and drain connections having not less than 25 mm 

diameter shall be installed on downstream side of flow switch. 

vi. ZCV shall have dial pressure gauges suitable for the water pressures that shall be 

fitted so that they can be easily removed for testing and checking without shutting 
down the water supply. Pressure gauge shall be installed between the butterfly 
valve and the water flow switch. 

vii. The minimum distance between the water flow switch and the butterfly valve and 

the test & drain valve shall be not less than 600 mm. 

viii.The water flow switch shall be mounted on the top of the pipe or as recommend-

ed by the original equipment manufactures data sheet. 

ix. All the equipment of ZCV assembly shall be rated for the system working pressure 
and water temperature service and approved by the Civil Defence department as 
per Section 6. 

x.  The ZCV assembly shall be installed in an easily accessible & visible locations, pref-

erably inside the star enclosure above the required headroom height.  

xi. ZCV assembly shall be provided with an identification sign board in a visible loca-

tion in both Arabic & English languages. 

xii. Where the ZCV assembly is located in a closed room or shaft, the access door or 

panel shall be provided with an identification sign board in visible location in both 
Arabic & English. 

 

 

Figure 9.17.: Zone Control Valve 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 598 of 1348 

 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

23. HYDRAULIC 

i.  The sprinkler design with Computerized Hydraulic calculations shall be provided 

CALCULATIONS 

to determine the fire water demand, pressure and pipe sizes required for a 
sprinkler system. 

ii.  The hydraulic calculation shall be performed using the Civil Defence listed and 

approved software. The following criteria shall be used for Hydraulic calcula-
tions. 

iii. Hydraulics bases shall be an occupancy hazard that is located to the farthest 

point or the top most of the source of fire water supply system within the occu-
pancy or density of discharge required according to the preset values as per 
occupancy classification. 

 

 

Figure 9.18.: Typical Standard Sprinkler System Network 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 599 of 1348 

 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

24. SPRINKLER 

ZONING AND 
AREA         
LIMITATIONS 

i.  The maximum floor area on any one floor to be protected by sprinklers supplied 
by any one sprinkler system riser or combined system riser shall be 4831 m2 for 
Light and Ordinary Hazard. Separate Alarm Check Valve (ACV) shall be used for 
each 4831 m2 sprinkler zones in light and ordinary hazards.. 

ii.  The maximum floor area on any one floor to be protected by sprinklers supplied 
by any one sprinkler system riser or combined system riser shall be 3720 m2 for 
Extra Hazard and Storage occupancies. Separate Alarm Check Valve (ACV) shall 
be used for each 3720 m2 sprinkler zones in extra hazards.. 

iii. The floor area occupied by mezzanines shall not be included in the area limits. 

25. PROTECTION 

i. 

AREA PER 
SPRINKLER 

 The protection area of coverage per sprinkler (As) shall be determined as S X L, 
As=S x L. 
a.  Where S is along the branch line, the distance between sprinklers (or to wall 
or obstruction in the case of the end sprinkler on the branch line) upstream 
and downstream. Choose the larger of either twice the distance to the wall 
or the distance to the next sprinkler on the same branch. 

b.  Where L is between the branch lines, perpendicular distance to the sprinkler 
on the adjacent branch line (or to a wall or obstruction in the case of the last 
branch line) on each side of the branch line on which the subject sprinkler is 
positioned. Choose the larger of either twice the distance to the wall or ob-
struction or the distance to the next sprinkler on the adjacent branch. 

 

 

Figure 9.19.: Protection Area per Sprinkler Head, As=SxL. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 600 of 1348 

 

 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

26.  PROTECTION 
AREA AND   
SPACING 

i.  The protection areas and the maximum spacing of various sprinkler heads, with a 
lenient consideration, shall comply with Table 9.7.F. unless the hazard demands 
a reduction in these figures. 

ii.  The distance from sprinklers to walls shall not exceed one-half of the allowable 

distance between sprinklers. 

iii. Under curved surfaces, the horizontal distance shall be measured at the floor 

level from the wall, or at the intersection of the curved surface and the floor to 
the nearest sprinkler shall not be greater than one-half the allowable distance 
between sprinklers. 

iv. The distance between sprinklers shall not be less than 1.8 m on center. 

27. STANDARD 

PENDENT 
AND           
UPRIGHT 
SPRINKLERS 

i.  The upright sprinkler heads shall be installed in such a way that their deflector is 
facing an upright position only with the frame arms parallel to the branch line to 
minimize the obstruction of its discharge pattern. 

ii.  Upright sprinklers shall be installed where there is no false ceiling, such as car 
park, stores, plant rooms and concealed spaces above false ceiling areas etc. 

iii. Pendent Sprinklers shall be installed as Recessed or concealed sprinklers where 

there is a false ceiling. 

iv. Pendent sprinklers installed as recessed or concealed sprinklers shall be per-

mitted to be used with, Civil Defence approved and listed flexible pipes. 

v.  The distance between the sprinkler deflector to the ceiling shall be not less than 

25mm and shall be not more than 300 mm. 

vi. Where the situation does not permits to locate the sprinkler head within 300mm 

from the ceiling and exceeds 300mm, it shall be fitted with a deflector plate 
made of stainless steel having a diameter not less than 200 mm and shall be 
attached to the deflector. 

vii. Sprinkler protective caps and straps shall be removed immediately after the com-

missioning of the sprinkler system. 

viii.Sprinklers shall be fitted with a protective guard where there is possibilities for 

accidental damage of sprinkler bulbs. 

ix.  The minimum distance between the sprinkler to the adjacent sprinkler shall be 

not less than 1.8 meters. 

x.  The maximum distance between the standard sprinkler and the adjacent stand-
ard sprinkler shall be not more than 4.5 meters. Where the extended coverage 
upright sprinklers are used, the maximum distance between sprinkler and sprin-
kler shall be not more than their approval listing as per the original equipment 
manufacturers technical data sheet. 

xi. The minimum distance between a sprinkler and a wall shall be not less than 100 

mm. 

xii. The maximum distance between a standard sprinkler and a wall shall be not 

more than 2.25 meters or ½ of the spacing between the sprinkler. 

xiii.There should not be any continuous or non-continuous obstructions such as col-
umns, beams, truss webs and chords, pipes, ducts, and other fixtures that could 
prevent a discharge pattern below the sprinkler head for less than or equal to 
500 mm.  

xiv.Sprinklers shall be installed under fixed obstructions over 800 mm wide such as 

ducts, cable trays, decks, open grate floorings etc. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 601 of 1348 

 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

27.  STANDARD 
PENDENT 
AND           
UPRIGHT 
SPRINKLERS 

xv.    The minimum clearance between the top of storage and the sprinkler head 

shall be not less than 500 mm and shall be 1000 mm in special situations for 
special sprinklers such as ESFR & ELO sprinklers. 

xvi.    Sprinklers under glass or plastic skylights exposed to the direct rays of the sun 

shall be of the intermediate-temperature classification. 

xvii      Where there is a vertical change in the ceiling elevation within the area of 

coverage of the sprinkler creating a distance of more than 900 mm between 
the upper ceiling and the sprinkler deflector, a vertical plane extending down 
from the ceiling at the change in elevation shall be considered a wall for the 
purpose of sprinkler spacing.  

xviii.    Where the distance between the upper ceiling and the sprinkler deflector is 
less than or equal to 900 mm, the sprinklers shall be permitted to be spaced 
as though the ceiling was flat, provided the obstruction rules and ceiling pock-
et rules are observed. 

xix.    Under an obstructed construction, the sprinkler shall be installed in each bay 
of such construction with the sprinkler deflector located not less than 25 mm 
to not more than 300mm from the ceiling. 

xx.      Sprinklers shall be located so as to minimize obstructions to discharge or addi-
tional sprinklers shall be provided to ensure an adequate coverage of the haz-
ard. 

xxi.     Sprinklers shall be permitted to be spaced on the opposite sides of obstruc-

tions not exceeding 1.2 m in width, provided the distance from the center line 
of the obstruction to the sprinklers does not exceed one-half the allowable 
distance permitted between sprinklers. 

xxii.    Obstructions located against the wall and that are not over 762 mm in width 

shall be permitted to be protected. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 602 of 1348 

 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

28. SIDEWALL 

SPRINKLERS 

i.  Sidewall sprinkler heads shall be installed along  a wall side, a side of a beam or 
beneath the flat smooth ceiling where upright or pendent sprinklers with open 
piping may not be desirable due to aesthetics issues. 

ii.  Sidewall sprinklers shall be installed such that their deflectors are aligned parallel 

to the ceiling or roof. 

iii. Sidewall sprinkler shall be installed on the ramps, for the protection of any office 

or room where there is no false ceiling and open piping is not desirable due to aes-
thetic issues. 

iv. Quick / fast response type sprinklers shall be installed in the light hazard areas.   
v.  The recessed / concealed pendent sprinklers shall be installed as per the installa-

tion guidelines recommended by the original equipment manufacturer. 

vi. Sidewall sprinkler protective caps and straps shall be removed immediately after 

the commissioning of the sprinkler system. 

vii. Sidewall sprinklers shall be fitted with a protective guard where there are possibili-

ties for accidental damage of sprinkler bulbs. 

viii.The distance between a side wall sprinkler deflector and the ceiling shall be not 
less than 100 mm and shall be not more than 150 mm. However in non combus-
tible ceiling areas the distance between the side wall sprinkler deflector and the 
ceiling shall be permitted to be 150mm to 300mm and 300mm to 450 mm if the 
sprinklers are listed for such use as per original equipment manufacturers tech-
nical data sheets. 

ix. Where soffits used for the installation of sidewall sprinklers exceed 203 mm in 

width or projection from the wall, additional sprinklers shall be installed below the 
soffit.  

x.  The minimum distance between the sprinkler and the adjacent sprinkler shall be 

not less than 1.8 m. 

xi. In light hazard occupancies, the maximum distance between the standard sidewall 

sprinkler and the adjacent standard sprinkler shall be not more than 4.25 m. and 
the room width shall be not more than 3.6 m. Where the extended coverage up-
right sprinklers are used, the maximum spacing between sprinklers along the wall 
and room width shall be not more than its approval listing as per the original 
equipment manufacturers technical data sheet. 

xii. In ordinary hazard occupancies, the maximum distance between the standard 

sidewall sprinklers to the adjacent standard sprinkler shall be not more than 3 m. 
and the room width shall be not more than 3 m. Where the extended coverage 
upright sprinklers are used, the maximum spacing between sprinklers along the 
wall and room width shall be not more than its approval listing as per the Original 
equipment manufacturers technical data sheet. 

xiii.The minimum distance between a sidewall sprinkler to a wall shall be not less 

than 100mm. 

xiv.The maximum distance between a standard sidewall sprinkler and a wall shall be 
not more than 2.125 m. in light hazard and shall be not more than 1.5 m. in ordi-
nary hazard or ½ of the spacing between the sprinkler. 

xv. There should not be any continuous or non-continuous obstructions such as col-
umns, beams, truss webs and chords, pipes, ducts and other fixtures that could 
prevent discharge pattern below the sprinkler head which is less than or equal to 
500 mm.  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 603 of 1348 

 

 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

28. SIDEWALL 

xvi.     Sprinklers shall be installed under fixed obstructions over 1.2 m wide such 

SPRINKLERS 

as ducts, cable trays, decks, open grate floorings etc. 

xvii.    The minimum clearance between the top of storage and the sidewall sprin-

kler head shall be not less than 500mm. 

xviii.   Sidewall sprinklers under glass or plastic skylights exposed to the direct rays 

of the sun shall be of the intermediate-temperature classification. 

xix.     Sidewall sprinklers shall be located so as to minimize obstructions to dis-

charge or additional sprinklers shall be provided to ensure an adequate cov-
erage of the hazard. 

xx.      Sidewall sprinklers shall be installed no closer than 1.2 m. from light fixtures 

or similar obstructions. 

29. OBSTRUCTIONS 

i.  The position of various types of sprinklers to avoid obstructions of discharge 

patterns shall be as per Table 9.7.D. 

Table 9.7.D: Maximum allowable distance of deflector above the obstruction base 

DISTANCE FROM SPRINKLERS TO  
OBSTRUCTIONS 
(A) 

STANDARD 
SPRINKLERS 
(B) 

SIDEWALL 
SPRINKLERS 
(B) 

EXTENDED    
COVERAGE 
SPRINKLERS 
(B) 

ESFR       
SPRINKLERS 
(B) 

1. Less than 300 mm  

2. 300 mm to less than 450 mm 

3. 450 mm to less than 600 mm 

0 mm 

65 mm 

90 mm 

25 mm 

75 mm 

115 mm 

4. 600 mm to less than 750 mm 

140 mm 

145 mm 

5. 750 mm to less than 900 mm 

190 mm 

175 mm 

6. 900 mm to less than 1050 mm 

240 mm 

200 mm 

7. 1050 mm to less than 1200 mm 

305 mm 

230 mm 

0 mm 

0 mm 

25 mm 

25 mm 

25 mm 

75 mm 

75 mm 

8. 1200 mm to less than 1350 mm 

355 mm 

250 mm 

125 mm 

9. 1350 mm to less than 1500 mm 

420 mm 

290 mm 

175 mm 

10. 1500 mm to less than 1700 mm 

457 mm 

325 mm 

175 mm 

11. 1700 mm to less than 1800 mm 

508 mm 

350 mm 

175 mm 

12. 1800 mm to less than 2000 mm 

600 mm 

380 mm 

225 mm 

13. 2000 mm to less than 2100 mm 

750 mm 

410 mm 

275 mm 

14. 2100 mm to less than 2300 mm 

875 mm 

440 mm 

350 mm 

15. 2300 mm to less than 2400 mm 

16. 2400 mm to less than 2600 mm 

17. 2600 mm to less than 2700 mm 

18. 2700 mm to less than 2900 mm 

19. 2900 mm to less than 3000 mm 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

350 mm 

375 mm 

425 mm 

475 mm 

525 mm 

0 mm 

35 mm 

75 mm 

140 mm 

200 mm 

250 mm 

300 mm 

375 mm 

450 mm 

550 mm 

650 mm 

775 mm 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 604 of 1348 

 

 
 
 
 
 

Figure 9.20.: Positioning of Sprinkler Deflectors from Obstructions 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 605 of 1348 

 

 
 
 
 
 

Figure 9.21.: Positioning of Sprinkler Deflectors from Obstructions 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 606 of 1348 

 

 
 
 
 
 

Figure 9.21.: Positioning of Sprinkler Deflectors from Obstructions 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 607 of 1348 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

30. HANGERS 

i.  Hangers shall be designed to support five times the weight of the water-filled pipe 

AND  
BRACES 

plus 250 lb (115 kg) at each point of piping support. 

ii.  The minimum distance between hangar supports, size of hangar rods, fasteners, 

bolts, clamps etc. shall be designed & selected and installed to withstand the load 5 
times the weight of water filled pipe, plus 115 kg load.  

iii. These points of support shall be adequate to support the system. 
iv. Hanger components shall be ferrous, listed and approved by Civil Defence as per      

Section 6. 

v.  All the supports provided for the sprinkler system piping shall allow the free move-

ment for expansion or contraction of pipe work and shall be located by ensuring that 
the branch lines or fittings are not affected by the supports during expansion or con-
traction of the pipe installation. 

vi. Sprinkler system main risers shall be supported by riser clamps or by hangers located 

on the horizontal connections within 600 mm of the center line of the riser. Riser 
clamps supporting risers by means of set screws and riser clamps anchored to walls 
using hanger rods in the horizontal position shall not be permitted to vertically sup-
port risers. 

vii. Vertical risers supported at the bottom of the riser at the lowest level, at each level, 

above & below the offsets and top of the risers. The maximum distance between 
each riser support shall not exceed 3 m. 

viii.An anchor support shall be provided at the base (bottom) of each vertical riser pipes 

to withstand the total weight of the pipe with water and to prevent the movement 
by an upward thrust in the sprinkler system. 

ix. The sizes of hanger rods, U-hooks and eye rods shall not be less than that of               

Table 9.7.E. 

x.  However, the hangars spacing and hangar rod size supporting the horizontal pipes 

shall be not less than the distance specified in Table 9.7.E. 

Table 9.5.E: Hanger Rods, U-Hooks, Eye Rod Sizes 

PIPE SIZES 

HANGER ROD    
SIZES 

U-HOOK   
SIZES 

EYE ROD   
SIZES 

BOLT OR ROD 
SIZES 

HANGER 
SPACING 

 

 

 

10 mm 

12 mm 

12 mm 

12 mm 

16 mm 

16 mm 

8 mm 

 

10 mm 

 

 

 

10 mm 

12 mm 

12 mm 

12 mm 

 

 

 

 

 

12 mm 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

10 mm 

12 mm 

12 mm 

12 mm 

16 mm 

20 mm 

2 meters 

2.5 meters 

 

 

 

3 meters 

3 meters 

3 meters 

3 meters 

Up to 50 mm 

65 mm to 100 mm 

65 mm to 150 mm 

Up to 100 mm 

125 mm 

150 mm 

200 mm 

250 mm 

300 mm 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 608 of 1348 

 

 

ITEMS 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

REQUIREMENTS 

31. A. DESIGN CRITERIA 

i.  All the design criteria for Automatic Sprinkler Systems provided in this 

BASED ON     
HAZARDS 

code are based on Single Point Design Density Selections. 

ii.  The automatic Sprinkler Design criteria based on the hazard category shall 

be as per Table 9.7.F. 

Table 9.7.F: Automatic Sprinkler Design Criteria based on Hazard Categories 

CRITERIA 

Design Density  
(mm/min) gpm/ft2 
Area of Operation        
( m2 ) Ft2 
Hose Stream Allowance, gpm 

1. 
LIGHT     
HAZARD 
      

2. 
ORDINARY  
HAZARD 
GROUP 1 

3. 
ORDINARY  
HAZARD 
GROUP 2 

4. 
EXTRA   
HAZARD 
GROUP 1 

5. 
EXTRA      
HAZARD 
GROUP 2 

(4.1) 0.10  

(6.1) 0.15  

(8.1) 0.20  

(12.2) 0.30   (16.3) 0.40  

(139) 1500 

(139) 1500 

(139) 1500  (232) 2500  (232) 2500 

50 gpm 

50 gpm 

50 gpm 

50 gpm 

50 gpm 

Total Water Demand, Gal. 

250 Gal. 

300 gpm 

350 gpm 

800 gpm 

1050 gpm 

Pump Capacity, without yard hydrant 
gpm 

Pump Capacity,  with yard hydrant 
gpm 

Standard Sprinkler            
Maximum Coverage Area 

Standard Sprinkler            
Maximum Spacing 

Extended Coverage Standard Sprinkler  
Maximum Coverage Area 

Extended Coverage Standard Sprinkler  
Maximum Spacing 

Sidewall Standard Sprinkler              
Maximum Coverage Area 

Sidewall Standard Sprinkler              
Maximum distance along wall (S) 

Sidewall Standard Sprinkler              
Maximum Room width (L) 

250 gpm 

300 gpm 

350 gpm 

750 gpm 

1000 gpm 

750 gpm 

750 gpm 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm  1500 gpm 

20.9 m2 

12.1 m2 

12.1 m2 

9.3 m2 

9.3 m2 

4.6 m 

4.6 m 

4.6 m 

3.7 m 

3.7 m 

37 m2 

30 m2 

30 m2 

18.2 m2 

13.4 m2 

6.1 m 

5.5 m 

5.5 m 

4.3 m 

4.6 m 

18.2 m2 

9.3 m2 

9.3 m2 

4.3 m 

3 m 

3 m 

11.1 m 

9.3 m 

9.3 m 

Not  
allowed 

Not  
allowed 

- 

- 

- 

- 

Extended Coverage Sidewall Sprinkler                              
Maximum Coverage Area 

37 m2 

37 m2 

37 m2 

Not  
allowed 

Not  
allowed 

Extended Coverage Sidewall Sprinkler  
Maximum Spacing 

ESFR (Early Suppression Fast Response) 
For ceiling height up to 9 m 
Maximum Coverage Area 

ESFR (Early Suppression Fast Response) 
For ceiling height up to 9 m 
Maximum Spacing 

ESFR (Early Suppression Fast Response) 
For ceiling height more than 9 m 
Maximum Coverage Area 

ESFR (Early Suppression Fast Response) 
For ceiling height more than 9 m 
Maximum Spacing 

 

8.5 m 

7.3 m 

7.3 m 

 

 

9.3 m2 

9.3 m2 

9.3 m2 

9.3 m2 

9.3 m2 

3.7 m 

3.7 m 

3.7 m 

3.7 m 

3.7 m 

9.3 m2 

9.3 m2 

9.3 m2 

9.3 m2 

9.3 m2 

3 m 

3 m 

3 m 

3 m 

3 m 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 609 of 1348 

 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. GENERAL NOTES FOR SPRINKLER DESIGN REQUIREMENTS  
 
i. 

Sprinkler design for various storage materials and storage arrangement 
shall be as per the tables Table 9.7.G., Table 9.7.H., Table 9.7.I., Table 
9.7.J., Table 9.7.K., Table 9.7.L., Table 9.7.M., Table 9.7.N., Table 
9.7.O., Table 9.7.P., Table 9.7.Q., Table 9.7.R., Table 9.7.S., Table 
9.7.T., Table 9.7.U., Table 9.7.V., Table 9.7.W., Table 9.7.X., Table 
9.7.Y., Table 9.7.Z., Table 9.7.AA., Table 9.7.BB., Table 9.7.CC., Table 
9.7.DD., Table 9.7.EE., Table 9.7.FF.,  and Table 9.7.GGG. 
Pump capacities based on the storage materials, storage height and 
storage arrangement shall be as per Table 9.7.G., Table 9.7.H., Table 
9.7.I., Table 9.7.J., Table 9.7.K., Table 9.7.L., Table 9.7.M., Table 9.7.N., 
Table 9.7.O., Table 9.7.P., Table 9.7.Q., Table 9.7.R., Table 9.7.S., Table 
9.7.T., Table 9.7.U., Table 9.7.V., Table 9.7.W., Table 9.7.X., Table 
9.7.Y., Table 9.7.Z., Table 9.7.AA., Table 9.7.BB., Table 9.7.CC., Table 
9.7.DD., Table 9.7.EE., Table 9.7.FF.,  and Table 9.7.GGG. 

ii. 

iii.  The pump capacity indicated in these tables is the duty point (primary 

rating point) of the pump. The fire pump design point and the head shall 
be selected based on the hydraulic calculation and fire pump character-
istic curve inline with NFPA 20. 

iv.  All sprinkler design densities are single point design criteria taken from 

v. 

NFPA 13 tables. 
The proposed pump capacities in these tables are rounded to the aver-
age and nearest capacities that are commercially available, listed and 
internationally listed and approved. 

vi.  Water Tank capacities shall be as per Section 4. of this chapter. 
vii.  The number of design sprinklers considered for ESFR type sprinkler pro-

tection shall be 12. 

viii.  The ceiling sprinkler design density for an aisle width between 1.2 m. 

and 2.4 m. shall be respectively determined by the linear interpolation 
of their densities.  

ix.  The in-Rack Sprinkler demand shall be calculated for the 8 remotest 

sprinkler. The in-rack Sprinkler minimum K factor shall be 5.6 and mini-
mum in-rack sprinkler pressure shall be 1 Bar. 

31.B. DESIGN CRITERIA 

BASED ON 
CHARTS 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 610 of 1348 

 

 

ITEMS 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

REQUIREMENTS 

32. DESIGN CRITERIA 
FOR IDLE PALLETS 

i.  The automatic Control Mode (Design/Area) Sprinkler Design criteria for idle 

wooden pallets stored indoors shall be as per Table 9.7.G. 

ii.  The automatic special application Sprinkler Design criteria for wooden pal-

lets stored indoors shall be as per (K11.2), Table 9.7.H.  

iii. The automatic Specific Application Sprinkler Design criteria for idle wooden 

pallets stored indoors on floor shall be as per (K16.8), Table 9.7.I. 

iv. The automatic Specific Application Sprinkler Design criteria for idle wooden 

pallets stored indoors on floor shall be as per (K19.6), Table 9.7.J. 

Table 9.7.G: Control Mode (Design/Area) for Idle Wooden Pallets Stored Indoors  

 
K-FACTOR 

MAXIMUM 
STORAGE 
HEIGHT 

MAXI-
MUM 
CEILING 
HEIGHT 

REQUIRED 
DESIGN DEN-
SITY Gpm 
(LPM) 

AREA OF SPRINKLER OPERA-
TION 
FT 2 (m2) 

HIGH TEMP 
SPRINKLER 

ORDINARY 
TEMP SPRIN-
KLER 

PUMP   
CAPACITY 
WITH HOSE 
DEMAND 

PUMP   
CAPACITY 
WITH  
YDRANTS 

8 (115)  
or Larger 

11.2 (160)  
or larger 

< 1.8 m 

6.1 m 

0.20 (8.2) 

2000 (186)  3000 (279) 

750 gpm 

1000 gpm 

< 2.4 m 

9.1 m 

0.45 (18.3) 

2500 (232) 

- 

1250 gpm  1500 gpm 

 
INDOOR       
STORAGE        
ARRANGE-
MENT 

ON FLOOR 

16.8 (242)  < 6.1 

9.1 m 

0.60 (24.5) 

- 

- 

- 

- 

ON FLOOR 
OR  RACK 
WITHOUT 
SOLID 
SHELVES 

11.2 (161)  
or larger 

2.4 m - 3.7 
m 

3.7 m - 6.1 
m 

9.1 m 

0.60 (24.5) 

3500 (325) 

- 

2000 gpm  2500 gpm 

9.1 m 

0.60 (24.5) 

4500 (418) 

- 

2500 gpm  3000 gpm 

Table 9.7.H: Specific Application for Idle Wooden Pallets Stored Indoors On Floor 

TYPE OF  
SYSTEM 

K-FACTOR / 
ORIENTATION 

MAXIMUM 
STORAGE 
HEIGHT 

MAXI-
MUM 
CEILING 
HEIGHT 

NUMBER OF DESIGN 
SPRINKLERS BY MINIMUM 
PRESSURE 
25 psi 

50 psi 

75 psi 

PUMP   CAPACI-
TY WITH HOSE 
DEMAND 

PUMP CAPACITY 
WITH  YDRANTS 

  
WET 
  

DRY 

11.2 (160) Upright  < 6.1 m 

9.1 m 

15 

11.2 (160) Upright  < 6.1 m 

9.1 m 

25 

- 

- 

- 

- 

1000 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

Table 9.7.I: Specific Application (K-factor 16.8) for Idle wooden Pallets Stored Indoors On Floor 

Table 9.5.F: Specific Application (K-factor 16.8) for Idle wooden Pallets Stored Indoors On Floor 

MAXIMUM 
STORAGE 
HEIGHT 

MAXIMUM 
CEILING 
HEIGHT 

NUMBER 
OF DESIGN 
SPRIN-
KLERS 
  

MINIMUM 
OPERAT-
ING PRES-
SURE 
(PSI) 

PUMP   CAPACI-
TY WITH HOSE 
DEMAND 

PUMP CAPACITY 
WITH  YDRANTS 

TYPE OFSYS-
TEM 

K-FACTOR/ 
ORIENTATION 
  

  
WET 
  
  
DRY 
  

16.8 (240) Upright 

6.1 m 

9.1 m 

16.8 (240) Upright 

6.1 m 

9.1 m 

15 

15 

15 psi 

1000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

15 psi 

1000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

Table 9.7.J: Specific Application (K-factor 19.6) for Idle wooden Pallets Stored Indoors On Floor 

TYPE OF SYS-
TEM 

K-FACTOR/ 
ORIENTATION 
  

MAXIMUM 
STORAGE 
HEIGHT 

MAXIMUM 
CEILING 
HEIGHT 

NUMBER 
OF DESIGN 
SPRIN-
KLERS 
  

MINIMUM 
OPERAT-
ING    
PRESSURE 
(PSI) 

PUMP   CAPACI-
TY WITH HOSE 
DEMAND 

PUMP CAPACITY 
WITH  YDRANTS 

19.6 (280) Pendent 

6.1 m 

9.1 m 

19.6 (280) Pendent 

6.1 m 

11 m 

19.6 (280) Pendent 

6.1 m 

12  m 

15 

15 

15 

16psi 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

25psi 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

30psi 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

  
WET 
  
  
WET 
  
  
WET 
  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 611 of 1348 

 

 

ITEMS 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

REQUIREMENTS 

33. DESIGN CRITERIA 
(ESFR) FOR IDLE  
PALLETS  

i.  The automatic ESFR Sprinkler Design criteria for idle wooden pallets stored 

indoors shall be as per Table 9.7.K. 

ii.  The automatic ESFR Sprinkler Design criteria for idle plastic pallets stored 

indoors shall be as per Table 9.7.L. 

Table 9.7.K: ESFR for Idle Wooden Pallets Stored Indoors  

STORAGE 
ARRANGE-
MENT 

COM-
MODITY 

MAXIMUM STORAGE HEIGHT (m) 

MINI-
MUM 
OPERAT-
ING PRES-
SURE 
(PSI) 

PUMP   
CAPACITY 
WITH HOSE 
DEMAND 

PUMP 
CAPACITY 
WITH  
YDRANTS 

  

7.6 
  

- 

6.1 
  

ON 
FLOOR 
OR 
RACKS    
WITH-
OUT 
SOLID 
SHELVE
S 

IDLE 
WOOD-
EN   
PAL-
LETS 

7.6 

  

ON 
FLOOR 

  

IDLE 
WOOD-
EN PAL-
LETS 

- 

MAXI-
MUM 
CEIL-
ING 
HEIG
HT 
(m) 

9.1 

10 

11 

12 

NOMINAL K-FACTORS 
FOR THE TYPE OF 
SPRINKLER ORIENTA-
TION 
  
UP-
RIGHT 
- 

  
PENDENT 
  
14 (201) 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 
- 
- 
- 
- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 
- 
- 

- 

- 

- 

16.8 (242) 

22.4 (322) 

25.2 (363) 

14 (201) 

16.8 (242) 

- 
- 
- 
- 
22.4 (322) 

25.4 (360) 

- 

16.8 (242) 

22.4 (322) 

25.2 (363) 

- 

- 

- 
- 
14 (201) 

16.8 (240) 

14 (201) 

16.8 (240) 

50 

35 

25 

15 

60 

42 

- 
- 
- 
- 
35 

20 

- 

52 

40 

25 

- 

- 

- 
- 
50 

35 

75 

52 

  

  

  

9.1 

  

11 

  
12 

13.7 

- 

9.1 

11 

  

 6.1 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

 
 
 
 
1500 gpm 

 
 
 
 
2000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2250 gpm 

- 

- 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

2000 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

- 

- 

- 

- 

 
 
1250 gpm 

 
 
1500 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

PUMP   
CAPACITY 
WITH HOSE 
DEMAND 

PUMP 
CAPACITY 
WITH  
YDRANTS 

1250 gpm 
1250 gpm 
 
 
1500 gpm 
1500 gpm 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1500 gpm 
1500 gpm 
 
 
2000 gpm 
2000 gpm 
 
 
 
 
 
 

- 

- 

 

 
 
 

- 

- 

 

 
 
 

STORAGE 
ARRANGE-
MENT 

COMMOD-
ITY 

MAXIMUM STORAGE HEIGHT 
(m) 

  

PENDENT 

14 (201) 
16.8 (242) 

MAXI-
MUM 
CEILING 
HEIGHT 
(m) 

NOMINAL K-FACTORS 
FOR THE TYPE OF 
SPRINKLER ORIENTA-
TION 
UP-
RIGHT 

Table 9.7.L: ESFR for Idle Plastic Pallets Stored Indoors  
MINI-
MUM 
OPER-
ATING 
PRES-
SURE 
(PSI) 
50 
35 
- 
- 
60 
42 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 

- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 

- 
- 

- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 

14 (201) 
16.8 (242) 

12 

- 

7.6 

  

9.1 

10 

- 

  

  

  

- 

11 

  

- 

IDLE     
PLASTIC 
PALLETS 

7.6 

  

ON 
FLOOR 
OR 
RACKS 
WITH-
OUT 
SOLID 
SHELVE
S 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 612 of 1348 

 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

34. DESIGN CRITE-

i.  The automatic Sprinkler Design criteria for Class I to Class IV stored palletized, 

solid piled or on shelf with storage height up to 3.7 m shall be as per Table 
9.7.M. 

RIA FOR CLASS I 
TO IV STORED 
PALLETIZED TO 
A HEIGHT OF 
UP TO  3.7 M 
AND 6.1 M. 

 

Table 9.7.M: Class I to Class IV stored palletized, solid piled or on shelves with storage height up to 3.7  

STORAGE  
ARRANGE-
MENT 

COMMODI-
TY CLASS 

MAXIMUM 
STORAGE 
HEIGHT 

REQUIRED   
DESIGNDENSITY 
Gpm (LPM) 

AREA OF  SPRINKLER 
OPERATION FT 2 (m2) 

PUMP   CAPACITY 
WITH HOSE DE-
MAND 

PUMP CAPACITY 
WITH  YDRANTS 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

IV 

IV 

PALLET-
IZED, 
BIN BOX, 
SHELF, 
IN RACK, 

PALLET-
IZED, BIN 
BOX, SHELF 

IN RACK 

 

< 3.7 m 

0.15 (6.1) 

1500 (140) 

 300 gpm  

750 gpm 

< 3 m 

0.15 (6.1) 

1500 (140) 

 300 gpm  

750 gpm 

3 m – 3.7 m 

0.20 (8.1) 

1500 (140) 

 350 gpm  

750 gpm 

< 3.7 m 

0.20 (8.1) 

1500 (140) 

 350 gpm  

750 gpm 

< 3 m 

0.20 (8.1) 

1500 (140) 

 350 gpm  

750 gpm 

3 m – 3.7 m 

0.20 (8.1) 

1500 (140) 

 350 gpm  

750 gpm 

3 m – 3.7 m 

0.30 (12.2) 

2500 (232) 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 613 of 1348 

 

 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

35. DESIGN CRITERIA 
FOR CLASS I TO IV 
STORED IN SINGLE 
OR DOUBLE ROW 
RACKS WITH 
STORAGE HEIGHT 
OF 3.7 M TO 6.1 M 
(WITHOUT SOLID 
SHELVES)  

i.  The automatic Sprinkler Design Criteria for Class I to IV stored in Single or 

Double row racks with storage height of 3.7 m to 6.1 m (Without Solid 
Shelves), shall be as per Table 9.7.O.  

ii.  The area of sprinkler operation shall be 186 m2 except for below. 

a.  The area of sprinkler operation shall be 215 m2 for design density 0.55 

(22.4), AMAO-(Assumed Maximum Area of Operation ) for high tem-
perature sprinklers. 

b.  The area of sprinkler operation shall be 370 m2 for design density 0.55 

(22.4), ordinary temperature  

iii.  Figure 9.22 is applicable for all design criteria in Table 9.7.O, except where 

in-rack sprinkler requirement is mandatory. 

iv.  The fire pump capacity indicated is for high temperature ceiling sprinkler 

and storage height of 6.1 m. 

Table 9.7.O: Class I to Class IV stored on racks without solid shelves with storage height 3.7 m—6.1 m 

CEILING SPRINKLER DESIGN DENSITY , Gpm/ft2 (mm/min) 

WITH IN RACK SPRINKLERS 

WITHOUT IN RACK SPRINKLERS 

SINGLE OR DOUBLE ROW 
RACKS 

SINGLE OR DOUBLE ROW RACKS 

AISLE WIDTH 
& 
ENCAPSULATION 

COM-
MODIT
Y CLASS 

IN RACK                
SPRIN-
KLERS 

HIGH              
TEMPERA-
TURE CEIL-
ING SPRIN-
KLER & OR-
DINARY            
TEMPERA-
TURE RACK 
SPRINKLER 

ORDINARY 
TEMPERA-
TURE CEIL-
ING SPRIN-
KLER & OR-
DINARY            
TEMPERA-
TURE RACK 
SPRINKLER 

HIGH               
TEMPERA-
TURE CEIL-
ING                 
SPRINKLERS 

ORDINARY         
TEMPERA-
TURE CEIL-
ING           
SPRINKLERS 

PUMP             
CAPACITY 
WITH HOSE 
DEMAND 
 

PUMP          
CAPACITY 
WITH  
YDRANTS 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

No Need 

No Need 

 

 

 

 

0.55 (22.4) 

0.55 (22.4)  1250 gpm 

2000 gpm 

0.55 (22.4) 

0.55 (22.4)  1250 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1 LEVEL 

0.35 (14.3) 

0.39 (15.9) 

1 LEVEL 

0.47 (19.1) 

0.55 (22.4) 

--- 

--- 

--- 

--- 

1000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

No Need 

No Need 

No Need 

No Need 

No Need 

No Need 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.32 (13.0) 

0.37 (15.0)  750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

0.38 (15.5) 

0.44 (17.9)  750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

0.43 (17.5) 

0.49 (20.0)  1000 gpm 

1250 gpm 

0.58 (23.6) 

0.60 (24.5)  1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

0.47 (19.1) 

0.54 (22.0)  1000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

0.47 (19.1) 

0.54 (22.0)  1000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1 LEVEL 

0.28 (11.4) 

0.32 (13.0) 

1 LEVEL 

0.39 (15.9) 

0.45 (18.3) 

--- 

--- 

--- 

--- 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

No Need 

No Need 

No Need 

No Need 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.29 (11.8) 

0.33 (13.4)  750 gpm 

1000 gpm 

0.32 (13.0) 

0.37 (15.0)  750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

0.37 (15.0) 

0.42 (17.1)  750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

0.49 (20.0) 

0.57 (23.2)  1000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1.2 M 
ENCAPSULAT-
ED 

1.2 M 
NOT ENCAP-
SULATED 

2.4 M 
ENCAPSULAT-
ED 

2.4 M 
NOT ENCAP-
SULATED 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 614 of 1348 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

36. DESIGN CRITERIA FOR 
CLASS I TO IV STORED 
ON RACKS OF 6.1 M 
TO AND 6.7 M. 
(WITHOUT SOLID 
SHELVES) 

i.  The automatic Sprinkler Design criteria for Class I to Class IV stored on 
single or double row racks with storage height 6.1 m to 6.7 m (without 
solid shelves) shall be as per Table 9.7.P., with Area of sprinkler opera-
tion of 2000 ft2 (186m2). 

ii.  Figure 9.22 is applicable for all design criteria in Table 9.7.P except 

where in-rack sprinkler requirement is mandatory. 

iii. The fire pump capacity indicated is for high temperature ceiling sprinkler 

and storage height of 6.7 m. 

 

Table 9.7.P: Class I to Class IV stored on racks without solid shelves and                                                             

storage height of 6.1 m to 6.7 m  

CEILING SPRINKLER DESIGN DENSITY , Gpm/ft2 (mm/min) 

WITH IN RACK SPRINKLERS 

WITHOUT IN RACK SPRINKLERS 

SINGLE OR DOUBLE ROW RACKS 

SINGLE OR DOUBLE ROW RACKS 

AISLE WIDTH 
& ENCAPSU-
LATION 

COM-
MODI
TY 
CLASS 

IN RACK   
SPRIN-
KLERS 

HIGH TEMPER-
ATURE CEIL-
ING SPRIN-
KLER & ORDI-
NARY                 
TEMPERA-
TURE RACK 
SPRINKLER 

ORDINARY TEM-
PERATURE CEIL-
ING SPRINKLER 
& ORDINARY             
TEMPERATURE 
RACK SPRINKLER 

HIGH          
TEMPER-
ATURE 
CEILING     
SPRIN-
KLERS 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

1 LEVEL 

1 LEVEL 

1 LEVEL 

1 LEVEL 

No Need 

No Need 

No Need 

No Need 

1 LEVEL 

1 LEVEL 

1 LEVEL 

1 LEVEL 

No Need 

No Need 

No Need 

No Need 

0.30 (12.2) 

0.35 (14.3) 

0.30 (12.2) 

0.35 (14.3) 

0.35 (14.3) 

0.39 (15.9) 

0.47 (19.1) 

0.55 (22.4) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.24 (9.8) 

0.24 (9.8) 

0.27 (11.0) 

0.27 (11.0) 

0.28 (11.4) 

0.32 (13.0) 

0.39 (15.9) 

0.45 (18.3) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

--- 

--- 

--- 

--- 

0.32 
(13.0) 

0.38 
(15.5) 

0.43 
(17.5) 

0.58 
(23.6) 

--- 

--- 

--- 

--- 

0.29 
(11.8) 

0.32 
(13.0) 

0.37 
(15.0) 

0.49 
(20.0) 

1.2 M 
ENCAPSULAT-
ED 

1.2 M 
NOT             
ENCAPSULAT-
ED 

2.4 M 
ENCAPSULAT-
ED 

2.4 M 
NOT              
ENCAPSULAT-
ED 

 

 

ORDI-
NARY 
TEM-
PERATU
RE CEIL-
ING  
SPRIN-
KLERS 

--- 

--- 

--- 

--- 

0.37 
(15.0) 

0.44 
(17.9) 

0.49 
(20.0) 

0.60 
(24.5) 

--- 

--- 

--- 

--- 

0.33 
(13.4) 

0.37 
(15.0) 

0.42 
(17.1) 

0.57 
(23.2) 

PUMP    
CAPACITY 
WITH HOSE 
DEMAND 

PUMP 
CAPACITY 
WITH  
YDRANTS 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1000 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1000 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 615 of 1348 

 

 

 

Figure 9.22.: Storage Height and Adjustment of Design Densities 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 616 of 1348 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

37. DESIGN CRITERIA FOR 
CLASS I TO IV STORED 
IN MULTIPLE ROW 
RACKS OF 4.9 M 
DEPTH AND AISLES 2.4 
M OR WIDER WITH 
STORAGE HEIGHT OF 
3.7 M TO 6.1 M. 

i.  The automatic Sprinkler Design Criteria for Class I to IV stored in Multi-

ple row racks of 4.9 m depth and aisles 2.4 m or wider with storage 
height of 3.7 m to 6.1 m shall be as per Table 9.7.R. with Area of sprin-
kler operation of 2000 ft2 (186m2). 

ii.  Figure 9.22 is applicable for all design criteria in Table 9.7.R. except for 

Class IV non encapsulated commodity till 4.6 m storage height. 

iii. The fire pump capacities indicated is for high temperature ceiling sprin-
kler for 4.6 m and 6.1 m storage height (with respect to the maximum 
storage height indicated) 

 

Table 9.7.R: Class I-Class IV stored on racks of 4.9 m depth, aisle 2.4 m or wider, height of 3.7 m-6.1 m 

HEIGHT 

COM-
MODITY 
CLASS 
  

ENCAPSU-
LATION 

IN RACK 
SPRIN-
KLERS 

CEILING SPRINKLER DESIGN DENSITY , Gpm/ft2 (mm/min) 

WITH IN RACK     SPRIN-
KLERS 

WITHOUT IN RACK     
 SPRINKLERS 

MULTIPLE ROW RACKS 

MULTIPLE ROW RACKS 

HIGH               
TEMPERA-
TURE CEIL-
ING         
SPRINKLER 
& ORDI-
NARY TEM-
PERATURE 
RACK 
SPRINKLER 

ORDINARY     
TEMPERA-
TURE CEIL-
ING         
SPRINKLER 
& ORDI-
NARY     
TEMPERA-
TURE RACK 
SPRINKLER 

HIGH         
TEMPERA-
TURE CEIL-
ING     
SPRIN-
KLERS 

ORDINARY 
TEMPERA-
TURE CEIL-
ING    
SPRINKLERS 

PUMP   
CAPACITY 
WITH HOSE 
DEMAND 

PUMP 
CAPACITY 
WITH  
YDRANTS 

No 

Yes 

No 

Yes 

No Need 

No 

No Need 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.37 (15.1)  0.41 (16.7) 

500 gpm 

1000 gpm 

0.46 (18.8)  0.51 (20.8) 

750 gpm 

1000 gpm 

0.42 (17.1)  0.47 (19.1) 

500 gpm 

1000 gpm 

0.52 (21.4)  0.59 (23.9) 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

0.47 (19.1)  0.52 (21.4) 

750 gpm 

1000 gpm 

Yes 

1 Level 

0.36 (14.6)  0.41 (16.7) 

N/A 

N/A 

750 gpm 

1000 gpm 

No 

No Need 

 

 

0.39 (15.7)  0.44 (17.9) 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

Yes 

1 Level 

0.48 (19.5)  0.56 (22.6) 

N/A 

N/A 

1000 gpm 

1250 gpm 

No 

Yes 

No 

Yes 

No Need 

No 

No Need 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.37 (15.1)  0.41 (16.7) 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

0.46 (18.8)  0.51 (20.8) 

1000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

0.42 (17.1)  0.47 (19.1) 

1000 gpm 

1250 gpm 

0.52 (21.4)  0.59 (23.9) 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

0.47 (19.1)  0.52 (21.4) 

1000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

Yes 

1 Level 

0.36 (14.6)  0.41 (16.7) 

No 

Yes 

1 Level 

0.39 (15.7)  0.44 (17.9) 

N/A 

N/A 

1000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

0.48 (19.5)  0.56 (22.6) 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

Over 
12 ft. 
(3.7 m) 
up to  
15 ft. 
(4.6 m) 

Over 
15 ft. 
(4.6 m) 
up to  
20 ft. 
(6.1 m) 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 617 of 1348 

 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

38. DESIGN CRITERIA FOR 

i.  The automatic Sprinkler Design Criteria for Class I to IV stored in Mul-

CLASS I TO IV STORED IN 
MULTIPLE ROW RACKS 
OF 4.6 M DEPTH AND 
AISLES NARROWER 
THAN 2.4 M, WITH 
STORAGE HEIGHT OF 3.7 
M TO 6.1 M. 

tiple row racks of 4.9 m depth and aisles narrower than 2.4 m, with 
storage height of 3.7 m to 6.1 m shall be as per Table 9.7.S. with Area 
of sprinkler operation of 2000 ft2 (186m2). 

ii.  Figure 9.22 is applicable for all design criteria in Table 9.7.S. except for 

Class IV non encapsulated commodity till 4.6 m storage height. 

iii. The fire pump capacities indicated is for high temperature ceiling 

sprinkler for 4.6 m and 6.1 m storage height (with respect to the maxi-
mum storage height indicated). 

 

Table 9.7.S: Class I-Class IV stored on racks of 4.9 m depth, Aisle less than 2.4 m, Height of 3.7 m-6.1 m 

HEIGHT 

COM-
MODITY 
CLASS 

ENCAPSU-
LATION 

IN RACK 
SPRIN-
KLERS 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

Over 

12 ft.  (3.7 
m) 

up to  

15 ft.  (4.6 
m) 

  

  

  

  

Over 

15 ft.  (4.6 
m) 

up to  

20 ft.  (6.1 
m) 

  

  

  

  

 

 

CEILING SPRINKLER DESIGN DENSITY , Gpm/ft2 (mm/min) 

WITH IN RACK SPRIN-
KLERS 

WITHOUT IN RACK SPRINKLERS 

MULTIPLE ROW RACKS 

MULTIPLE ROW RACKS 

HIGH TEM-
PERATURE 
CEILING 
SPRINKLER 
& ORDI-
NARY 
TEMPERA-
TURE RACK 
SPRINKLER 

ORDINARY 
TEMPERA-
TURE CEIL-
ING SPRIN-
KLER & 
ORDINARY 
TEMPERA-
TURE RACK 
SPRINKLER 

HIGH TEM-
PERATURE 
CEILING 
SPRIN-
KLERS 

ORDINARY 
TEMPERA-
TURE CEIL-
ING SPRIN-
KLERS 

PUMP   
CAPACITY 
WITH 
HOSE DE-
MAND 

PUMP 
CAPACITY 
WITH  
YDRANTS 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.37 (15.1)  0.41 (16.7) 

500 gpm 

1000 gpm 

0.46 (18.8)  0.51 (20.8) 

 750 gpm 

1000 gpm  

0.42 (17.1)  0.47 (19.1) 

 500 gpm 

1000 gpm  

0.52 (21.4)  0.59 (23.9) 

 750 gpm 

1250 gpm  

0.47 (19.1)  0.52 (21.4) 

 750 gpm 

1000 gpm  

No 

Yes 

No 

No Need 

Yes 

No 

Yes 

1 Level 

0.36 (14.6)  0.41 (16.7) 

N/A 

N/A 

 750 gpm 

1250 gpm  

No 

No Need 

 

 

0.39 (15.7)  0.44 (17.9) 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

Yes 

No 

Yes 

No 

Yes 

No 

Yes 

No 

Yes 

1 Level 

0.58 (23.6)  0.66 (26.9) 

0.23 (9.3) 

0.26 (10.6) 

0.29 (11.7)  0.33 (13.2) 

0.26 (10.6)  0.30 (12.2) 

1 Level 

0.33 (13.2)  0.38 (15.2) 

0.29 (11.7)  0.33 (13.2) 

0.36 (14.6)  0.41 (16.7) 

0.39 (15.7)  0.44 (17.9) 

0.58 (23.6)  0.66 (26.9) 

N/A 

N/A 

N/A 

N/A 

1000 gpm   1500 gpm  

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1000 gpm 

1250 gpm 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1500 gpm   2000 gpm  

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 618 of 1348 

 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

39. DESIGN CRITERIA FOR 

i.  The automatic Sprinkler Design criteria for Class I to Class IV stored on 

CLASS I TO IV STORED IN 
SINGLE OR DOUBLE 
ROW RACKS TO A STOR-
AGE HEIGHT OF 6.7 M 
TO AND  7.6 M. 
(WITHOUT SOLID 
SHELVES) 

single or double row racks with storage height up to 6.7 m to 7.6 m 
(without solid shelves) shall be as per Table 9.7.T. with Area of sprin-
kler operation of 2000 ft2 (186m2) 

ii.  Figure 9.22 is applicable for all design criteria in Table 9.7.T. except 

where in-rack sprinklers requirement are mandatory. 

iii. The fire pump capacities indicated is for high temperature ceiling 

sprinkler for storage height of 7.6 m. 

Table 9.7.T: Class I to Class IV stored on Single and Double row racks with storage 6.7 m to 7.6 m  

AISLE 
WIDTH & 
ENCAPSU-
LATION 

COM-
MODIT
Y 
CLASS 

IN RACK 
SPRIN-
KLERS 

CEILING SPRINKLER DESIGN DENSITY , Gpm/ft2 (mm/min) 

WITH IN RACK SPRIN-
KLERS 

SINGLE OR DOUBLE ROW 
RACKS 

HIGH TEM-
PERATURE 
CEILING 
SPRINKLER & 
ORDINARY                 
TEMPERA-
TURE RACK 
SPRINKLER 

ORDINARY 
TEMPERA-
TURE CEILING 
SPRINKLER & 
ORDINARY 
TEMPERA-
TURE RACK 
SPRINKLER 

WITHOUT IN RACK SPRINKLERS 

SINGLE OR DOUBLE ROW RACKS 

HIGH TEM-
PERATURE 
CEILING 
SPRINKLERS 

ORDINARY 
TEMPERA-
TURE                  
CEILING      
SPRINKLERS 

PUMP CA-
PACITY WITH 
HOSE                 
DEMAND 

PUMP CA-
PACITY WITH 
HYDRANTS 

1 LEVEL 

1 LEVEL 

1 LEVEL 

1 LEVEL 

No Need 

No Need 

No Need 

1 LEVEL 

1 LEVEL 

1 LEVEL 

1 LEVEL 

1 LEVEL 

No Need 

No Need 

No Need 

1 LEVEL 

0.30 (12.2) 

0.35 (14.3) 

0.30 (12.2) 

0.35 (14.3) 

0.35 (14.3) 

0.39 (15.9) 

0.47 (19.1) 

0.55 (22.4) 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1000 gpm  1500 gpm 

1250 gpm  1500 gpm 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.32 (13.0) 

0.35 (14.3) 

1250 gpm  1500 gpm 

0.38 (15.5) 

0.44 (17.9) 

1500 gpm  2000 gpm 

0.43 (17.5) 

0.49 (20.0) 

1500 gpm  2000 gpm 

0.39 (15.9) 

0.44 (17.9) 

0.24 (09.8) 

0.27 (11.0) 

0.24 (09.8) 

0.27 (11.0) 

0.28 (11.4) 

0.32 (13.0) 

0.39 (15.9) 

0.45 (18.3) 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

1000 gpm  1500 gpm 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1000 gpm  1500 gpm 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.29 (11.8) 

0.28 (11.4) 

1000 gpm  1500 gpm 

0.32 (13.0) 

0.37 (15.0) 

1250 gpm  1500 gpm 

0.37 (15.0) 

0.42 (17.1) 

1250 gpm  2000 gpm 

0.32 (13.0) 

0.37 (15.0) 

- 

- 

1000 gpm  1500 gpm 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

1.2 M 
ENCAPSU-
LATED 

1.2 M 
NOT              
ENCAPSU-
LATED 

2.4 M 
ENCAPSU-
LATED 

2.4 M 
NOT              
ENCAPSU-
LATED 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 619 of 1348 

 

 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

40. DESIGN CRITERIA FOR 
CLASS I TO IV STORED 
IN MULTIPLE ROW 
RACKS OF 4.9 M DEPTH 
AND AISLES 2.4 M NAR-
ROWER AND WIDER 
WITH STORAGE HEIGHT 
OF 6.1 M TO 7.6 M. 

i.  The automatic Sprinkler Design Criteria for Class I to IV stored in Multi-

ple row racks of 4.9 m depth and aisles 2.4 m or wider with storage 
height of 6.1 m to 7.6 m shall be as per Table 9.7.U. with Area of 
sprinkler operation of 2000 ft2 (186m2) 

ii.  The automatic Sprinkler Design Criteria for Class I to IV stored in Multi-
ple row racks of 4.9 m depth and aisles narrower than 2.4 m with stor-
age height of 6.1 m to 7.6 m shall be as per Table 9.7.V. with Area of 
sprinkler operation of 2000 ft2 (186m2) 

iii. Figure 9.22 is applicable only for design criteria where in-rack sprin-

klers are not required. 

iv. The fire pump capacities indicated is for high temperature ceiling 

sprinkler for storage height of 4.6 m to 7.6 m. 

Table 9.7.U: Class I-Class IV stored on racks of 4.6 m depth, aisle 2.4 m or wider, height of 6.1 m-7.6 m 

HEIGHT 

COM-
MODITY 
CLASS 

ENCAPSU-
LATION 

IN RACK 
SPRINKLERS 

CEILING SPRINKLER WATER DEMAND , Gpm (LPM) 

WITH IN RACK SPRINKLERS  WITHOUT IN RACK SPRINKLERS 

MULTIPLE ROW RACKS 

MULTIPLE ROW RACKS 

HIGH TEMPERA-
TURE CEILING 
SPRINKLER & 
ORDINARY             
TEMPERATURE 
RACK SPRINKLER 

ORDINARY TEM-
PERATURE CEIL-
ING         SPRIN-
KLER &        ORDI-
NARY              
TEMPERATURE  

HIGH             
TEMPERATURE 
CEILING SPRIN-
KLERS 

ORDINARY 
TEMPERATURE 
CEILING  SPRIN-
KLERS 

PUMP CAPACI-
TY WITH HOSE 
DEMAND 

PUMP CAPACI-
TY WITH HY-
DRANTS 

 

 

No 

No Need 

Yes 

No 

Yes 

1 Level 

0.29 (11.7) 

0.33 (13.2) 

0.37 (15.1)  0.41 (16.7) 

Over 
20 ft.       
(6.1 m) 
up to  
25 ft.       
(7.6 m) 
  
  
  
  
2000 gpm 
Table 9.7.V: Class I-Class IV stored on racks of 4.6 m depth, Aisle less than 2.4 m, Height of 6.1 m-7.6 m 

0.30 (12.2) 

0.38 (15.2) 

0.33 (13.2) 

0.41 (16.7) 

0.44 (17.9) 

0.56 (22.6) 

0.26 (10.6) 

0.33 (13.2) 

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

1250 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1000 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

0.29 (11.7) 

0.36 (14.6) 

No 

Yes 

No 

Yes 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

0.48 (19.5) 

0.39 (15.7) 

III 

IV 

N/A 

N/A 

1500 gpm 

I 

II 

1 Level 

2 Levels 

CEILING SPRINKLER WATER DEMAND , Gpm (LPM) 

HEIGHT 

COM-
MODITY 
CLASS 
  

ENCAP-
SULATI
ON 

IN 
RACK 
SPRIN-
KLERS 

WITH IN RACK SPRINKLERS 

MULTIPLE ROW RACKS 

HIGH TEMPERATURE 
CEILING SPRINKLER 
& ORDINARY           
TEMPERATURE RACK 
SPRINKLER 

ORDINARY           
TEMPERATURE    
CEILING SPRINKLER & 
ORDINARY           
TEMPERATURE RACK 
SPRINKLER 

PUMP CAPACITY 
WITH HOSE DE-
MAND 

PUMP CAPACITY 
WITH HYDRANTS 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

No 

Yes 

No 

Yes 

No 

Yes 

No 

Yes 

1 Level 

2 Lev-

els 

0.23 (9.3) 

0.26 (10.6) 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

0.29 (11.7) 

0.33 (13.2) 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

0.26 (10.6) 

0.30 (12.2) 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

0.33 (13.2) 

0.38 (15.2) 

1000 gpm 

1250 gpm 

0.29 (11.7) 

0.33 (13.2) 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

0.36 (14.6) 

0.41 (16.7) 

1000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

0.39 (15.7) 

0.44 (17.9) 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

0.58 (23.6) 

0.66 (26.9) 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

Over 
20 ft. 
(6.1 m) 
up to  
25 ft. 
(7.6 m) 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 620 of 1348 

 

 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

i.  The automatic Sprinkler Design criteria of CMSA and Nominal K-
factor for Class I to Class IV, Plastic and Rubber stored palletized, 
solid piled or on shelf with storage height up to 7.6 m shall be as per 
Table 9.7.X. 

41. DESIGN CRITERIA OF 

CMSA (CONTROL MODE 
SPECIFIC APPLICATION) 
AND NOMINAL K-FACTOR 
FOR CLASS I TO IV, RUB-
BER, PLASTIC STORED 
PALLETIZED, SOLID PILED 
TO A HEIGHT OF 7.6 M.  

Table 9.7.X: Class I to Class IV, Rubber, Plastic stored palletized, solid piled with storage up to 7.6 m  

STORAGE     
AR-
RANGEM
ENT 

COMMOD-
ITY CLASS 

MAXI-
MUM 
STOR-
AGE 
HEIGHT 
Meters 

MAXI-
MUM 
CEIL-
ING 
HEIGHT 
Meters 

NUMBER 
OF      
SPRIN-
KLERS 

CMSA TYPE 
NOMINAL K-
FACTOR 11.2 (161) 

K-FACTOR 16.8 (242) NUMBER OF SPRINKLERS 
BY      MINIMUM DESIGN PRESSURE 

I 

II 

III 

I or II 

III or IV 

IV 

PLASTICS 
AND RUB-
BER       
CARTONED 
OR    EX-
POSED           
UNEX-
PANDED 
PLASTIC 
AND RUB-
BER        
CARTONED 
OR    EX-
POSED       
EXPANDED 
PLASTICS 
AND RUB-
BER       
CARTONED 
OR    EX-
POSED            
UNEX-
PANDED 

I 

I 

II 

II 

III 

III 

IV 

IV 

PALLET-
IZED 

SOLID 
PILED 

 

7.6 

7.6 

7.6 

7.6 

7.6 

6.1 

6.1 

10.7 

10.7 

10.7 

9.1 

9.1 

9.1 

9.1 

15 

15 

15 

- 

- 

15 

25 

7.6 

9.1 

- 

- 

DE-
SIGN 
PRES-
SURE 

25 psi 

25 psi 

25 psi 

- 

- 

50 psi 

25 psi 

10 psi 
(0.7 
bar) 

22 psi 
(1.5 
bar) 

PUMP       
CAPACITY 
WITH HOSE 
DEMAND 

PUMP      
CAPACITY 
WITH        
HYDRANTS 

- 

- 

- 

15 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

1000 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1000 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1000 gpm 

1250 gpm 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

15 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

- 

- 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

15 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

5.5 

7.9 

15 

50 psi 

- 

6.1 

9.1 

15 

50 psi 

- 

- 

- 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

7.6 

9.1 

- 

- 

- 

15 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

6.1 

7.6 

6.1 

7.6 

6.1 

7.6 

6.1 

7.6 

9.1 

9.1 

9.1 

9.1 

9.1 

9.1 

9.1 

9.1 

15 

- 

15 

- 

15 

- 

15 

- 

25 psi 

- 

- 

15 

25 psi 

- 

- 

15 

25 psi 

- 

50 psi 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

15 

- 

15 

1000 gpm 

1250 gpm 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1000 gpm 

1250 gpm 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1000 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 621 of 1348 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

42. DESIGN CRITERIA OF 

i.  The automatic Sprinkler Design criteria of ESFR for Class I to Class IV, 

stored palletized, solid piled or on shelf shall be as per Table 9.7.Y. for 
a minimum of 12 sprinkler heads. 

ESFR FOR CLASS I TO IV, 
STORED PALLETIZED, 
SOLID PILED  

 

 

Table 9.7.Y: ESFR for Class I to Class IV, stored palletized, solid piled   

STOR-
AGE 
AR-
RANGEM
ENT 

COM-
MODITY 

MAXI-
MUM 
STOR-
AGE 
HEIGHT 

MAXI-
MUM 
CEILING 
HEIGHT 
Meters 

PALLET-
IZED OR 
SOLID 
PILED 

CLASS I, 
II, III, IV 

6.1 

7.6 

7.6 
  

9.1 

7.6 

10 

9.1 

11 

11 

12 

11 

12 

14 

14 

NOMINAL K-FACTORS FOR 
THE TYPE OF SPRINKLER 

UPRIGHT 

PENDENT 

14 (201) 

14 (201) 

16.8 (242) 

16.8 (242) 

- 
- 

22.4 (322) 
25.2 (363) 

14 (201) 

14 (201) 

16.8 (242) 

16.8 (242) 

- 

- 

22.4 (322) 

25.2 (363) 

14 (201) 

14 (201) 

- 

  

16.8 (242) 
- 

- 

- 

16.8 (242) 

14 (201) 

16.8 (242) 
22.4 (322) 

25.2 (363) 

14 (201) 

16.8 (242) 

16.8 (242) 

- 

- 

- 

- 
- 

- 

22.4 (322) 

25.2 (363) 

22.4 (322) 

25.2 (363) 
22.4 (322) 

25.2 (363) 

MINIMUM 
OPERAT-
ING PRES-
SURE (PSI) 

PUMP       
CAPACITY 
WITH HOSE 
DEMAND 

PUMP  
 CAPACITY WITH        
HYDRANTS 

50 

35 

25 
15 

50 

35 

25 

15 

60 

42 

75 

52 
35 

20 

75 

52 

40 

25 

40 

40 
40 

40 

1250 gpm  1500 gpm 

1250 gpm  1500 gpm 

1500 gpm  2000 gpm 
1250 gpm  1500 gpm 

1250 gpm  1500 gpm 

1250 gpm  1500 gpm 

1500 gpm  2000 gpm 

1250 gpm  1500 gpm 

1500 gpm  2000 gpm 

1500 gpm  2000 gpm 

1500 gpm  2000 gpm 

1500 gpm  2000 gpm 

1500 gpm  2000 gpm 

1500 gpm  2000 gpm 

1500 gpm  2000 gpm 

1500 gpm  2000 gpm 

2000 gpm  2000 gpm 

1500 gpm  2000 gpm 

2000 gpm  2000 gpm 

2000 gpm  2500 gpm 
2000 gpm  2000 gpm 

2000 gpm  2500 gpm 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 622 of 1348 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

43. DESIGN CRITERIA OF 

i.  The automatic Sprinkler Design criteria of CMSA (Control Mode Specific 

Application) and Nominal K-factor 11.2 (160) for Class I to Class IV, 
stored on Single, Double or Multiple racks with storage height up to 7.6 
m shall be as per  Table 9.7.Z.a.                                            

CMSA AND NOMINAL 
K-FACTOR FOR CLASS I 
TO IV, STORED IN SIN-
GLE, DOUBLE OR MUL-
TIPLE RACKS TO A 
HEIGHT OF 7.6 M.  

 
 

 

 

Table 9.7.Z.a.: CMSA and Nominal K-factor 11.2 for Class I to Class IV, stored in Racks up to 7.6 m 

TYPE OF 
SYSTEM 

COMMODI-
TYCLASS 

MAXIMUM 
STORAGE 
HEIGHT 

MAXIMUM 
CEILING 
HEIGHT 

LARGE DROP TYPE 
NOMINAL K-FACTOR 11.2 (160) / ORIENTATION 

NUMBER OF 
SPRINKLERS 

DESIGN PPRES-
SURE 

PUMP         
CAPACITY 
WITH HOSE 
DEMAND 

PUMP  
 CAPACITY 
WITH       
HYDRANTS 

6.1 

7.6 

6.1 

7.6 

9.1 

15 / upright 

25 psi 

1000 gpm 

1250 gpm 

9.1 

9.1 

9.1 

20 / upright 

25 psi 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

15 / upright 

25 psi 

1000 gpm 

1250 gpm 

15+ 1 level of 
in-rack 

25 psi 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

7.6 

10.6 

15+ 1 level of 
in-rack 

25 psi 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

7.6 

15/upright 

50 psi 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

20/ upright 

15 / upright 

15+ 1 level of 
in-rack 

20+ 1 level of 
in-rack 

15+ 1 level of 
in-rack 

50 psi 

75 psi 

50psi 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

50 psi 

2000 gpm 

2500 gpm 

75 psi 

2000 gpm 

2000 gpm 

25 / upright 

25 psi 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

30 / upright 

25 psi 

2000 gpm 

2000 gpm 

25 / Upright 

25 psi 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

6.1 

6.1 

7.6 

9.1 

9.1 

7.6 

10.6 

6.1 

7.6 

6.1 

9.1 

9.1 

9.1 

I, II 

III 

IV 

I,II 

III 

WET 

PRE- 
ACTION  
 
OR  
 
DRY 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 623 of 1348 

 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

44. DESIGN CRITERIA OF 

CMSA AND NOMINAL K
-FACTOR FOR CLASS I 
TO IV, STORED IN SIN-
GLE, DOUBLE OR MUL-
TIPLE RACKS TO A 
HEIGHT OF 7.6 M.  

i.  The automatic Sprinkler Design criteria of CMSA (Control Mode Spe-
cific Application) and Nominal K-factor 16.8 (240)  for Class I to Class 
IV, stored on Single, Double or Multiple racks with storage height up to 
7.6 m shall be as per Table 9.7.Z.b.                                           

 
 

Table 9.7.Z.b. CMSA and Nominal K-factor of 16.8 for Class I to Class IV,                                                          

stored in Racks up to 7.6 m 

K-FACTOR 16.8 (240) NUMBER OF SPRINKLERS BY MINIMUM DESIGN PRES-
SURE / ORIENTATION 

10 PSI 
(0.7 BAR) 

15 PSI 
(1  BAR) 

22 PSI 
(1.5 BAR) 

35 PSI 
(2.4 BAR) 

PUMP         
CAPACITY 
WITH HOSE 
DEMAND 

PUMP  
 CAPACITY 
WITH        
HYDRANTS 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1250 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

15 / 
upright 

15 / 
upright 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

  

- 

- 

- 
- 

- 

15 / 
upright 

  

15 / up-
right 

15+ 1 
level of 
in-rack  

- 

15 / up-
right 

15 / up-
right 

15 / up-
right 

- 

- 
  

- 

- 

TYPE OF 
SYSTEM 

COMMODI-
TYCLASS 

MAXI-
MUM 
STORAGE 
HEIGHT 

MAXI-
MUM 
CEILING 
HEIGHT 

I, II 

III 

WET 

6.1 

9.1 

7.6 

9.1 

6.1 

7.6 

9.1 

9.1 

7.6 

10.6 

6.1 

7.6 

6.1 

9.1 

IV 

7.6 

9.1 

7.6 

10.6 

6.1 

7.6 

6.1 

9.1 

9.1 

9.1 

PRE- 
ACTION  
 
OR  
 
DRY 

I,II 

III 

 

 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 
  

- 

- 
  

- 

- 

- 

20+ 1 
level of in
-rack 

15+ 1 
level of in
-rack 

2000 gpm 

2500 gpm 

25 / 
upright 

30 / 
upright 

25 / 
upright 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

2000 gpm 

2500 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 624 of 1348 

 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

45. DESIGN CRITERIA OF 

i.  The automatic Sprinkler Design criteria of CMSA (Control Mode Specific 

CMSA AND NOMINAL K
-FACTOR FOR CLASS I 
TO IV, STORED IN SIN-
GLE, DOUBLE OR MUL-
TIPLE RACKS TO A 
HEIGHT OF 7.6 M.  

 
 

Application) and Nominal K-factor 19.6 (280)  for Class I to Class IV, 
stored on Single, Double or Multiple racks with storage height up to 7.6 
m shall be as per Table 9.7.Z.c.                                            

Table 9.7.Z.c.: CMSA and Nominal K-factor of 19.6 for Class I to Class IV, stored in Racks up to 7.6 m 

TYPE OF 
SYSTEM 

COM-
MODIT
YCLASS 

MAXI-
MUM 
STOR-
AGE 
HEIGHT 

MAXI-
MUM 
CEILING 
HEIGHT 

K-FACTOR 19.6 (280) NUMBER OF SPRINKLERS BY MINIMUM DESIGN PRESSURE / 
ORIENTATION 

16 PSI 
(1.1 BAR) 

25 PSI 
(1.7 BARS) 

30PSI 
(2.1 BARS) 

PUMP       
CAPACITY WITH 
HOSE DEMAND 

PUMP  
 CAPACITY 
WITH  YDRANTS 

6.1 

9.1 

15 / pendent 

7.6 

9.1 

15 / pendent 

6.1 

9.1 

15 / pendent 

7.6 

9.1 

15 / pendent 

- 

- 

  

  

I, II 

III 

- 

- 

  

  

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

7.6 

10.6 

- 

15 / pendent 

 
 
15 / pendent 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

6.1 

7.6 

15 / pendent 

6.1 

9.1 

15 / pendent 

IV 

7.6 

9.1 

15 / pendent 

- 

- 
- 

- 

- 

- 
- 

- 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

7.6 

10.6 
 
 
12.2 

- 
  

15 / pendent 
 
  

- 
  
 
15 / pendent 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

WET 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 625 of 1348 

 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

46. DESIGN CRITERIA OF 

CMSA AND NOMINAL K-
FACTOR FOR CLASS I TO 
IV, STORED IN SINGLE, 
DOUBLE OR MULTIPLE 
RACKS TO A HEIGHT OF 
OVER 7.6 M.  

i.  The automatic Sprinkler Design criteria of CMSA (Control Mode Spe-
cific Application) and Nominal K-factor 11.2 (160) for Class I to Class 
IV, stored on Single, Double or Multiple racks with storage height over 
7.6 m shall be as per Table 9.7.AA.a.    

ii.  NFPA 13 shall be followed for in-rack installation criteria.                                   
 
 

 

Table 9.7.AA.a.: CMSA and Nominal K-factor of 11.2 for Class I to Class IV, stored in Racks Over 7.6 m 

TYPE OF           
SYSTEM 

COMMODITY 
CLASS 

MAXIMUM 
STORAGE 
HEIGHT 

MAXIMUM 
CEILING 
HEIGHT 

LARGE DROP TYPE 
NOMINAL K-FACTOR 11.2 (160)/ ORIENTATION 

NUMBER OF 
SPRINKLERS 

DESIGN 
PRESSURE 

PUMP   CAPACITY 
WITH HOSE DE-
MAND 

PUMP  
 CAPACITY WITH  
YDRANTS 

9.1 

        10.6 

I, II 

20 + 1 
level of in 
rack / up-
right 

    25 PSI 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

10.6 

        12.1 

    - 

    - 

WET 

III, IV 

9.1 

        10.6 

    - 

    - 

  

  

  

  

  

10.6 

  

  

12.1 

    - 

    - 

 

 

 

 

 

 

PRE -ACTION 
OR  
DRY 

I, II 

9.1 

        10.6 

30 + 1 
level of in 
rack / up-
right 

25 PSI 

2000 gpm 

2500 gpm 

10.6 

        12.1 

36 /upright 

55 psi 

3000 gpm 

3500 gpm 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 626 of 1348 

 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

47. DESIGN CRITERIA OF CMSA 
AND NOMINAL K-FACTOR 
FOR CLASS I TO IV, STORED 
IN SINGLE, DOUBLE OR 
MULTIPLE RACKS TO A 
HEIGHT OF OVER 7.6 M.  

i.  The automatic Sprinkler Design criteria of CMSA (Control Mode 

Specific Application) and Nominal K-factor 16.8 (240) for Class I to 
Class IV, stored on Single, Double or Multiple racks with storage 
height over 7.6 m shall be as per Table 9.7.AA.b.         

ii.  NFPA 13 shall be followed for in-rack installation criteria.                                   
                              
 
 

Table 9.7.AA.b.: CMSA and Nominal K-factor 16.8 for Class I to Class IV, stored in Racks Over 7.6 m 

TYPE OF 
SYSTEM 

COMMODITY 
CLASS 

MAXIMUM 
STORAGE 
HEIGHT 

MAXIMUM 
CEILING 
HEIGHT 

K-FACTOR 16.8 (240) NUMBER OF SPRINKLERS BY MINIMUM DESIGN 
PRESSURE / ORIENTATION 

  
15 PSI(I BAR) 

  
22 PSI(1.5 BARS) 

PUMP   CAPACI-
TY WITH HOSE 
DEMAND 

PUMP        
CAPACITY 
WITH  
YDRANTS 

  

  

    - 

    - 

    - 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

 

 

 

 

 

 

12.1 

    - 

    - 

9.1 

        10.6 

  

20 + 1 level 
of in rack  

  

10.6 

        12.1 

    - 

        10.6 

    - 

9.1 

  

10.6 

  

  

9.1 

        10.6 

30 + 1 level 
of in rack  

    - 

2000 gpm 

2500 gpm 

10.6 

        12.1 

  

 36 /upright 

3000 gpm 

3500 gpm 

WET 

I, II 

 

III, IV 

PRE -ACTION 
OR  
DRY 

I, II 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 627 of 1348 

 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

48. DESIGN CRITERIA OF CMSA 
AND NOMINAL K-FACTOR 
FOR CLASS I TO IV, 
STORED IN SINGLE,     
DOUBLE OR MULTIPLE 
RACKS TO A HEIGHT OF 
OVER 7.6 M.  

i.  The automatic Sprinkler Design criteria of CMSA (Control Mode 

Special Application)  and Nominal K-factor 19.6 (280) for Class I to 
Class IV, stored on Single, Double or Multiple racks with storage 
height over 7.6 m shall be as per Table 9.7.AA.c.          

ii.  NFPA 13 shall be followed for in-rack installation criteria.                                   
                            
 
 

Table 9.7.AA.c.: CMSA and Nominal K-factor of 19.6 for Class I to Class IV, stored in Racks Over 7.6 m 

TYPE OF 
SYSTEM 

COMMODITY 
CLASS 

MAXIMUM 
STORAGE 
HEIGHT 

MAXIMUM 
CEILING 
HEIGHT 

9.1 

        10.6 

I, II 

10.6 

        12.1 

K-FACTOR 19.6 (280) NUMBER OF SPRINKLERS BY MINIMUM DESIGN 
PRESSURE /ORIENTATION 

  
25 PSI(I.7 
BARS) 

  
30 PSI(2.1 
BARS) 

PUMP   CAPACITY 
WITH HOSE DE-
MAND 

PUMP CAPACITY 
WITH  YDRANTS 

 

  

15 /                
pendent 

  

  

    - 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

15 /                
pendent 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

WET 

III, IV 

9.1 

        10.6 

15 /                  
pendent 

    - 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

  

  

  

  

  

10.6 

  

  

  

  

12.1 

    - 

1500 gpm 

15 /                  
pendent 

2000 gpm 

9.1 

        10.6 

    - 

    - 

10.6 

        12.1 

    - 

    - 

 

 

 

 

PRE -
ACTION 
OR  
DRY 

I, II 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 628 of 1348 

 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

49. DESIGN CRITERIA OF ESFR 

i.  The automatic Sprinkler Design criteria of ESFR for Class I to Class IV, 

FOR CLASS I TO IV, 
STORED  IN  SINGLE, 
DOUBLE OR MULTIPLE 
RACKS UP TO A HEIGHT 
OF 7.6 M 

 
 

stored in Single, Double or Multiple racks with storage height up to 
7.6 m shall be as per Table 9.7.BB., for a minimum of 12 sprinkler 
heads. 

Table 9.7.BB.: ESFR for Class I to Class IV, stored in Racks up to a height of 7.6 m 

STORAGE 
ARRANGE-
MENT 

COM-
MODITY 

MAXIMUM 
STORAGE 
HEIGHT 
(m) 

MAXI-
MUM    
CEILING 
HEIGHT 
(m) 

  

7.6 

MINIMUM 
OPERATING 
PRESSURE (PSI) 

PUMP   
CAPACITY 
WITH 
HOSE 
DEMAND 

PUMP CA-
PACITY WITH  
YDRANTS 

50 

35 

25 

15 

50 

35 

25 

15 

60 

42 

75 

52 

35 

20 

75 

52 

40 

25 

- 

- 

40 

40 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

2000 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

- 

- 

- 

- 

2000 gpm 

2000 gpm 

2000 gpm 

2500 gpm 

NOMINAL K-FACTORS 
FOR THE TYPE OF SPRIN-
KLER ORIENTATION 

UPRIGHT 

PENDENT 

14 (201) 

14 (201) 

16.8 
(242) 

- 

- 

16.8 (242) 

22.4 (322) 

25.2 (363) 

14 (201) 

14 (201) 

16.8 
(242) 

- 

- 

16.8 (242) 

22.4 (322) 

25.2 (363) 

14 (201) 

14 (201) 

16.8 
(242) 

16.8 (242) 

14 (201) 

14 (201) 

9.1 

9.8 

16.8 
(242) 

10.7 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

  

  

12.2 

13.7 

16.8 (242) 

22.4 (322) 

25.2 (363) 

14 (201) 

16.8 (242) 

22.4 (322) 

25.2 (363) 

- 

 

22.4 (322) 

25.2 (363) 

SINGLE-ROW, 
DOUBLE-
ROW, AND 
MULTIPLE-
ROW RACK 
(NO OPEN-
TOP         
CONTAINERS) 

CLASS I, II, 
III, OR IV, 
ENCAPSU-
LATED OR 
NOT EN-
CAPSULAT
ED 

6.1 

  

7.6 

  

  

  

  

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 629 of 1348 

 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

50. DESIGN CRITERIA OF 

ESFR FOR CLASS I TO IV, 
STORED  IN    SINGLE, 
DOUBLE OR MULTIPLE 
RACKS UP TO A HEIGHT 
OF OVER 7.6 M 

i.  The automatic Sprinkler Design criteria of ESFR for Class I to Class IV, 
stored in Single, Double or Multiple racks with storage height of over 
7.6 m shall be as per Table 9.7.CC., for a minimum of 12 sprinkler 
heads. 

 
 

Table 9.7.CC.: ESFR for Class I to Class IV, stored in Racks up to a height of over 7.6 m 

STORAGE    
ARRANGE-
MENT 

COMMODI-
TY 

MAXIMUM STOR-
AGE HEIGHT (m) 

SINGLE-
ROW, DOU-
BLE-ROW, 
AND MULTI-
PLE-ROW 
RACK (NO 
OPEN-TOP 
CONTAIN-
ERS) 

CLASS I, II, III, 
OR IV, ENCAP-
SULATED OR 
NOT ENCAP-
SULATED 

9.1 

  

  

  

10.7 

  

  

12.2 

MAXI-
MUM 
CEILING 
HEIGHT 
(m) 

NOMINAL K-FACTORS 
FOR THE TYPE OF 
SPRINKLER ORIENTA-
TION 

UPRIGHT 

PEN-
DENT 

14 (201) 

14 (201) 

16.8 (242) 

16.8 (242) 

10.7 

12.2 

13.7 

  

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

22.4 (322) 

25.2 (363) 

14 (201) 

16.8 (242) 

22.4 (322) 

25.2 (363) 

- 

- 

22.4 (322) 

25.2 (363) 

MINI-
MUM 
OPER-
ATING 
PRES-
SURE 

75 

52 

35 

20 

75 

52 

40 

20 

- 

- 

40 

40 

PUMP   
CAPACITY 
WITH 
HOSE 
DEMAND 

PUMP 
CAPACITY 
WITH  
YDRANTS 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

2000 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

- 

- 

- 

- 

2000 gpm 

2000 gpm 

2000 gpm 

2500 gpm 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 630 of 1348 

 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

51. DESIGN CRITERIA 
GROUP A PLASTIC 
STORED PALLETIZED, 
BIN BOX, SHELF OR 
RACKS WITH STORAGE 
HEIGHT UP TO 3.7 M. 

i.  The automatic Sprinkler Design criteria for Group A plastic stored pal-
letized, bin box, shelf or racks with storage height of up to 3.7 m shall 
be as per Table 9.7.DD. 

 
 

Table 9.7.DD.: Group A Plastic stored up to 3.7 m 

COMMODITY CLASS 

STORAGE 
ARRANGE-
MENT 

MAXI-
MUM 
STORAGE 
HEIGHT 

MAXI-
MUM 
CEIL-
ING 
HEIGHT 

RE-
QUIRED 
DESIGN  
DENSITY 
Gpm 
(LPM) 

AREA OF 
SPRIN-
KLER 
OPERA-
TION 
FT 2 (m2) 

IN 
RACK 
SPRIN-
KLER 
  

PUMP   
CAPACITY 
WITH HOSE 
DEMAND 

PUMP 
CAPACITY 
WITH  
YDRANTS 

GROUP A PLASTIC CAR-
TONED 
UNEXPANDED AND 
EXPANDED 

  

GROUP 
A PLAS-
TIC 
EX-
POSED 

UNEXPAND-
ED AND 
EXPANDED 

UNEXPAND-
ED 

PALLETIZED 

BIN 
BOX,SHELF, 

IN RACK 
PALLETIZED 
BIN BOX, 
SHELF 
IN RACK 
PALLETIZED 
BIN BOX, 
SHELF, IN 
RACK 
PALLETIZED 
BIN BOX, 
SHELF 

IN RACK 

PALLETIZED 
BIN BOX, 
SHELF, IN 
RACK 

< 1.5 m 
1.5 m – 3 m 
1.5 m – 3 m 
3 m – 3.7 m 
3 m – 3.7 m 

- 
4.6 m 
6 .1 m 
5.2 m 
10  m 

0.20 (8.1) 
0.30 (12.2) 
0.40 (16.3) 
0.40 (16.3) 
0.20 (8.1) 

1500 (140)  No need 
2500 (232)  No need 
2500 (232)  No need 
2500 (232)  No need 
1500 (140) 
1 LEVEL 

350 gpm 

750 gpm 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

500 gpm 

1000 gpm 

3 m – 3.7 m 

10  m 

0.40 (16.3) 

2500 (232)  No need 

1000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

3 m – 3.7 m 
< 1.5 m 

10  m 

- 

0.20 (8.1) 
0.20 (8.1) 

1500 (140) 
1 LEVEL 
1500 (140)  No need 

400 gpm 

750 gpm 

350 gpm 

750 gpm 

1.5 m – 3 m 

4.6 m 

0.40 (16.3) 

2500 (232)  No need 

1000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1.5m–2.4m 
3 m – 3.7 m 

8.5 m 
5.2 m 

0.40 (16.3) 
0.40 (16.3) 

2500 (232)  No need 
2500 (232)  No need 

1000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

3 m – 3.7 m 
3 m – 3.7 m 

5.2 m 
10  m- 

0.40 (16.3) 
0.20 (8.1) 

2500 (232)  No need 
1 LEVEL 
1500 (140) 

1000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

500 gpm 

1000 gpm 

1.5 m – 3 m 

6.1 m 

0.40 (16.3) 

2500 (232)  No need 

1000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

EXPANDED 

IN RACK 

1.5 m – 3 m 

6.1 m 

0.20 (8.1) 

1500 (140) 

1 LEVEL 

500 gpm 

1000 gpm 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 631 of 1348 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

52. DESIGN CRITERIA OF 

i.  The automatic ESFR Sprinkler Design criteria for Group A Plastic and 

ESFR SPRINKLERS FOR 
PALLETIZED OR SOLID 
PILED GROUP A PLAS-
TIC AND RUBBER. 

 

Rubber stored palletized of solid piled shall be as per Table 9.7.EE., for a 
minimum of 12 sprinkler head operation. 

ii.  ‘*’ Not applicable to storage height of 6.1 m. 
 
 

Table 9.7.EE.: ESFR for Group A Plastic and Rubber palletized or Solid Piled 

STOR-
AGE        
AR-
RANGE
MENT 

COM-
MODITY 

MAXIMUM STORAGE HEIGHT 
(Meters) 

MAXI-
MUM 
CEILING 
HEIGHT 
(Meters
) 

NOMINAL K-
FACTORS FOR THE 
TYPE OF SPRINKLER  
ORIENTATION 

UP-
RIGHT 

PEN-
DENT 

MINI-
MUM 
OPER-
ATING  
PRES-
SURE 

  

14 (201) 

14 (201) 

PALLET-
IZED OR 
SOLID 
PILED 

PLASTIC       
CAR-
TONED 
UNEX-
PANDED 

  

  

  

6.1 

  

7.6 

  

9.1 

  

  

11 

  

12 

6.1 

PLASTIC           
EXPOSED      
UNEX-
PANDED 

  

7.6 

  

PALLET-
IZED OR 
SOLID 
PILED 
  

6.1 

PLASTIC           
CAR-
TONED 
EXPAND-
ED 

  

7.6 

  

  

  

9.1 

  

  

  

  

11 

  

  

7.6 

16.8 (242) 

- 
- 

14 (201) 
16.8 (242) 

- 
- 

14 (201) 
16.8 (242) 

- 
- 

- 

- 
- 
- 
- 

- 

- 

- 

- 
- 
- 
- 

- 

- 

  

14 (201) 
16.8 (242) 

14 (201) 
16.8 (242)

- 

9.1 

11 

12 

14 

7.6 

9.1 

11 

12 

7.6 

9.1 

16.8 (242) 
22.4 (322) 
25.2 (363) 
14 (201) 
16.8 (242) 
22.4 (322) 
25.2 (363) 
14 (201) 
16.8 (242) 
22.4 (322) 
25.2 (363) 

14 (201) 

16.8 (242) 
22.4 (322) 
25.2 (363) 
22.4 (322) 

25.2 (363) 

14 (201) 

16.8 (242) 

14 (201) 
16.8 (242) 
14 (201) 
16.8 (242) 

14 (201) 

16.8 (242) 
25.2 (363)
* 
14 (201) 
16.8 (242) 

14 (201) 
16.8 (242) 

10 

14 (201)* 

14 (201)* 

7.6 

  

12 

16.8 (242)

* 
  

16.8 (242)
* 
25.2 (363) 

PLASTIC        
EXPOSED 
& EX-
PANDED 

 

PUMP   
CAPACITY 
WITH 
HOSE 
DEMAND 

PUMP 
CAPACITY 
WITH  
YDRANTS 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1250 gpm 
1500 gpm 
1250 gpm 
1250 gpm 
1250 gpm 
1500 gpm 
1250 gpm 
1500 gpm 
1500 gpm 
1500 gpm 
1500 gpm 

1500 gpm 
2000 gpm 
1500 gpm 
1500 gpm 
1500 gpm 
2000 gpm 
1500 gpm 
2000 gpm 
2000 gpm 
2000 gpm 
2000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1500 gpm 
2000 gpm 
1500 gpm 
1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 
2500 gpm 
2000 gpm 
2000 gpm 

2000 gpm 

2000 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1250 gpm 
1250 gpm 
1500 gpm 
1500 gpm 

1500 gpm 
1500 gpm 
2000 gpm 
2000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

50 

35 
25 
15 
50 
35 
25 
15 
75 
52 
35 
20 

75 

52 
40 
25 
40 

40 

50 

35 

50 
35 
75 
52 

75 

52 

 50 

2000 gpm 

2500 gpm 

50 
35 

50 
35 

60 

42 

60 

1250 gpm 
1250 gpm 

1250 gpm 
1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 
1500 gpm 

1500 gpm 
1500 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

2500 gpm 

2500 gpm 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 632 of 1348 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

53. DESIGN CRITERIA FOR 
TIRES STORED SOLID 
PILED, ON SHELF OR IN 
RACKS UP TO 3.7 M 

i.  The automatic Sprinkler Design criteria for Tires stored solid piled, on 

shelf or in racks with storage height of up to 3.7 m shall be as per Table 
9.7.FF. 

 

Table 9.7.FF: Tires stored up to height of 3.7 m 

COM-
MODITY 
CLASS 

STORAGE       
ARRANGEMENT 

MAXIMUM 
STORAGE 
HEIGHT 

MAXI-
MUM 
CEILING 
HEIGHT 

REQUIRED 
DESIGN  
DENSITY 
Gpm 
(LPM) 

AREA OF        
SPRINKLER       
OPERA-
TION 
FT 2 (m2) 

IN 
RACK 
SPRIN-
KLER 
  

PUMP   CAPACI-
TY WITH HOSE 
DEMAND 

PUMP CAPACITY 
WITH  YDRANTS 

TIRES 
  

ON FLOOR, ON 
SIDE 
ON FLOOR, ON 
TREAD OR ON 
SIDE 
SINGLE DOUBLE 
OR MULTIPLE-
ROW ON RACKS 
ON TREAD OR ON 
SIDE 
SINGLE-ROW 
RACK,          PORT-
ABLE, ON TREAD 
OR ON SIDE 
SINGLE-ROW 
RACK, FIXED, ON 
TREAD OR ON 
SIDE 

1.5 m – 3.7 m 

10  m 

0.30 (12.2) 

2500 (232) 

No need 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

<1.5 m 

<1.5 m 

  

  

0.20 (8.1) 

1500 (140) 

No need 

350 gpm 

750 gpm 

0.20 (8.1) 

1500 (140) 

No need 

350 gpm 

750 gpm 

1.5 m – 3.7 m 

10  m 

0.30 (12.2) 

2500 (232) 

No need 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1.5 m – 3.7 m 

10  m 

0.30 (12.2) 

2500 (232) 

No need 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1.5 m – 3.7 m 

10  m 

0.20 (8.1) 

1500 (140) 

1 LEVEL 

500 gpm 

1000 gpm 

 

 

Figure 9.24.: Tire Storage arrangement for illustration 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 633 of 1348 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

54. DESIGN CRITERIA 

i.  The automatic Sprinkler Design criteria for Rolled Paper with storage 

height of up to 3.7 m shall be as per Table 9.7.GG. 

FOR ROLLED PAPER 
STORED UP TO 3.7 M 

 
 

 

Table 9.7.GG: Rolled Paper stored up to height of 3.7 m 

COMMODITY 
CLASS 

STORAGE         
ARRANGE-
MENT 

MAXI-
MUM 
STORAGE 
HEIGHT 
(Meters) 

MAXI-
MUM 
CEILING 
HEIGHT 
(Meters) 

REQUIRED   
DESIGN 
DENSITY 
Gpm (LPM) 

AREA OF 
SPRINKLER 
OPERATION 
FT 2 (m2) 

IN RACK 
SPRIN-
KLER 
  

PUMP   
CAPACITY 
WITH 
HOSE 
DEMAND 

PUMP CA-
PACITY 
WITH  
YDRANTS 

ON END 

< 3 m 

8 m 

0.20 (8.1) 

1500 (140) 

No need 

350 gpm 

750 gpm 

ON END 

< 3 m 

8 m 

0.30 (12.2) 

2500 (232) 

No need 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

ROLLED PAPER 
HEAVY AND     
MEDIUM 
WEIGHT 

ROLLED PA-
PER, TISSUE 
AND LIGHT 
WEIGHT 

 

Figure 9.25.: Paper Roll warehouse for illustration 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 634 of 1348 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

55. DESIGN CRITERIA 

FOR INDOOR 
STORAGE OF 
FLAMMABLE AND 
COMBUSTIBLE              
LIQUIDS IN METAL 
CONTAINERS 

i.  Water miscible flammable and combustible liquids with a concentration less 
than 50% and stored in metal containers shall be protected as Class IV com-
modity. 

ii.  All other type of flammable and combustible liquids stored in metal contain-
ers shall be protected by a fire water sprinkler system as per Table 9.7.HH. 
iii. The in-rack sprinkler design shall be based on the 8 most remote sprinklers 

if there is one level of in-rack sprinklers or 6 most remote sprinklers for 2 
levels of in-rack sprinklers or 6 most remotes sprinklers for top 3 levels, if 
there are three or more levels of in-rack sprinklers. Water demand per in-
rack sprinkler shall be 30 GPM. In-rack sprinkler shall be K5.6 ordinary tem-
perature quick response type.  

iv. Refer to Table 9.7.KK. For Sprinkler layouts and Schemes. 

Table 9.7.HH.: Water Miscible Flammable and Combustible Liquids in Metal Containers 

LIQUID 

STOR-
AGE 
TYPE 

STOR-
AGE 
HEIGHT 
M 

CEIL-
ING 
HEIGHT 
M 

FIRE WATER SPRINKLER SYSTEM DESIGN 
CRITERIA 

PUMP CAPACITY 

CEILING 

SPRINKLER 

IN-
RACK 
LAYOUT 

WITHOUT 
HY-
DRANT 
GPM 

WITH 
HY-
DRANT 
GPM 

DESIGN 
AREA 
m2 

DESIGN 
DENSI-
TY 
mm/
min 

NON-RELIEVING TYPE CONTAINER OF SIZE ≤ 1 GAL. 

6.1 

1.8 

9.1 

5.5 

K ≥11.2/QR/
HT 
K ≥8.0/QR/
HT 

24.4 

186 

L – 2 

2000  

2500  

7.8 

139 

- 

500 

750  

NON-RELIEVING TYPE CONTAINER OF SIZE ≤ 5 GAL. 

Class IB/IC/II/
IIIA 

All Class 

Class IB/IC/II/
IIIA 

Rack 

Shelf 

Rack 

Pallet 

7.6 

1.5 

9.1 

5.5 

9.1 

Pallet 

2 

Class IIIB 

Rack 

12.2 

15.2 

Class IB/IC/II/
IIIA 

Pallet 

Rack 

Rack 

Pallet 

4.3 

7.6 

3.7 

5.5 

9.1 

9.1 

Class IIIB 

Rack 

12.2 

15.2 

Pallet 

5.5 

9.1 

 

 

K ≥8.0/QR/
HT 
K ≥8.0/QR/
HT 
K ≥11.2/QR/
HT 
K ≥8.0/QR/
HT 
K ≥8.0/QR/
HT 

K ≥11.2/QR/
HT 
K ≥8.0/QR/
HT 
K ≥11.2/QR/
HT 
K ≥8.0/QR/
HT 
K ≥8.0/QR/
HT 

5.5 

9.1 

278 
RELIEVING TYPE CONTAINER OF SIZE ≤ 5 GAL. 

10.5 

- 

- 

1000 

1250 

1500 

2000 

26.5 

186 

12.2 

278 

L – 3 

1500  

2000  

12.2 

278 

18.3 

278 

- 

- 

1250  

1500  

1500 

2000 

12.21 

186 

L – 4 

1500 

1500 

12.2 

278 

L-4,7 

1500 

2000 

24.2 

278 

- 

2000 

2500 

12.21 

186 

L-4,7 

1500 

1500 

10.5 

278 

- 

1000 

1250 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 635 of 1348 

 

Table 9.7.HH.: Water Miscible Flammable and Combustible Liquids in Metal Containers 

Liquid 

Storage 
Type 

Storage 
Height 
m 

Ceiling 
Height 
m 

Fire Water Sprinkler System Design 
Criteria 

Pump Capacity 

Ceiling 

Sprinkler 

In-rack 
Layout 

Without 
Hydrant 
gpm 

With 
Hydrant 
gpm 

Design 
Density 
mm/
min 

Design 
Area 
m2 

NON-RELIEVING TYPE CONTAINER OF SIZE >5 & ≤60 GAL. 

Class IB/IC/II/
IIIA 

Rack 

Pallet 

7.6 

1.5 

9.1 

5.5 

Class IIIB 

Rack 

12.2 

15.2 

16.3 

278 

L-5 

2000 

2500 

16.3 

278 

- 

1500 

1500 

12.21 

278 

L – 4 

1500 

2000 

K ≥11.2/
SR/HT 
K ≥11.2/
SR/HT 
K ≥8.0/SR/
HT 
K ≥8.0/SR/
HT 

K ≥11.2/
SR/HT 
K ≥8.0/SR/
HT 
K ≥11.2/
SR/HT 

Pallet 

5.5 
RELIEVING TYPE CONTAINER OF SIZE >5 & ≤60 

14.3 

278 

9.1 

- 

1250 

1500 

Class IB/IC/II/
IIIA 

Rack 

7.6 

Pallet 

2 

9.1 

9.1 

Class IIIB 

Rack 

12.2 

15.2 

Pallet 

5.5 

9.1 

K ≥11.2/
SR/HT 
K ≥11.2/
SR/HT 
K ≥8.0/SR/
HT 
K ≥8.0/SR/
HT 

24.4 

278 

L-6,7 

2500 

2500 

24.4 

278 

- 

2000 

2000 

12.21 

278 

L-4,7 

1500 

2000 

14.3 

278 

- 

1250 

1500 

RELIVING TYPE PORTABLE TANK & IBC 

Rack 

7.6 

9.1 

Rack 

12.2 

15.2 

24.4 

278 

L-5,7 

2500 

2500 

12.21 

278 

L-4,7 

1500 

2000 

Class IB/IC/II/
IIIA 

Class IIIB 

All Class 

Pallet 
UNSATURATED POLYESTER RESIN IN NON-RELIEVING METAL CONTAINER 

2 High 

24.4 

278 

9.1 

- 

2000 

2000 

All Class 

All 

3.1 

10.1 

K ≥11.2/
SR/HT 

18.3 

278 

- 

1500 

2000 

Container Size in US Gallons, Height in meters, Design Density in mm/min, Design area in Sq. meter. SH - Maxi-
mum Storage Height, CH - Maximum Ceiling Height, DD - Design Density, DA - Design Area, 

Note: (1) - Increase ceiling density to 24.4mm/min where more than one level of storage is over top in-rack level. 

(2). Refer to Table 9.7.KK. For Sprinkler layouts and Schemes. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 636 of 1348 

 

 

ITEMS 

56. DESIGN CRITE-

RIA FOR IN-
DOOR STORAGE 
OF FLAMMABLE 
AND COMBUS-
TIBLE              
LIQUIDS IN      
NON-METAL     
CONTAINERS 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

REQUIREMENTS 

i.  Water miscible flammable and combustible liquids with concentration less 
than 20% and stored in non-metal container shall be protected as Class IV 
commodity. 

ii.  Water miscible flammable and combustible liquids with concentration 20% to 
50% and stored in non-metal container shall be protected as Group A Plastic. 
iii. All other flammable and combustible liquids stored in non-metallic containers 

shall be protected as per Table 9.7.II. 

iv. The in-rack sprinkler design shall be based on the 6 most remote sprinklers for 

one level of in-rack sprinkler or 4 most remote sprinklers for top 2 levels if 
there are two levels or more levels of in-rack sprinklers. Demand per in-rack 
sprinkler shall be 60 gpm for Scheme S - A & S - B and 30 gpm for Scheme S - C.  

v.  In-rack sprinkler shall be Ordinary temperature quick response type. 
vi. Ceiling sprinkler shall be standard response type. 
vii. Plastic container shall not be permitted if protection criteria are not available 

as per Table 9.7.II, unless full scale fire test is carried out by listing body for 
protection criteria and approved by Dubai Civil Defense.  

viii.Refer to Table 9.7.KK. For Sprinkler layouts and Schemes. 

Table 9.7.II.: Flammable and Combustible Liquids in Non-Metallic Containers 

Liquid 

Stor-
age 
Type 

Storage 
Height 
m 

Ceiling 
Height 
m 

Ceiling 

Sprinkler 
Type 

In-rack 

Pump Capacity 

Schem
e 

Sprin
kler 
Type 

Without 
Hydrant 
gpm 

With 
Hydrant 
gpm 

Design 
Density 
mm/
min 

De-
sign 
Area 
m2 

WATER IMMISCIBLE LIQUID IN PLASTIC CONTAINER  OF SIZE ≤ 1 OZ PACKED IN DOUBLE CORRUGATED BOX  
Class IB/
IC/II/III 

Protection shall be as per NFPA 13 for Group A Unexpanded Plastic 

All 

WATER IMMISCIBLE LIQUID IN PLASTIC CONTAINER ≤ 5, CARTOONED / UN-CARTOONED 

Class IIIB 
(>93°C) 

Rack 

All 

All 

K8/OT/

SR 

8 

270 

K8 

S - A 

1250 

1500 

WATER IMMISCIBLE LIQUID IN FLEXIBLE PLASTIC LINER WITHIN A COMPOSITE CORRUGATED PAPERBOARD 

Class IIIB 
(>190°C) 

Rack 

All 

All 

270 

K5.
6 

S - C 

1000 

1250 

BOX OF SIZE ≤ 6 GAL 
K8/OT/

OF SIZE ≤ 275 GAL 
K8/OT/

SR 

SR 

8 

8 

WATER IMMISCIBLE LIQUID IN FLEXIBLE PLASTIC LINER CORRUGATE PAPERBOARD IBC                         

Class IIIB 
(>190°C) 

Rack 

8.5 

9.1 

270 

K5.
6 

S - C 

1000 

1250 

WATER MISCIBLE LIQUID IN PLASTIC CONTAINER  OF SIZE ≤ 1 GALLON CARTOONED 

Class IB/
IC//II/III 

Rack

1 

All 

All 

K8/OT/

SR 

8 

270 

K8 

S - B 

1250 

1500 

WATER MISCIBLE LIQUID IN PLASTIC CONTAINER  OF SIZE ≤ 60 GALLON CARTOONED / UNCARTONED 

Class IB/
IC/II/III 

Rack

1 

7.6 

9.1 

K8/OT/

SR 

18.3 

270 

K8 

S - B 

2000 

2000 

WATER MISCIBLE / IMMISCIBLE LIQUID IN LISTED / LABELED IBC CONTAINERS OF SIZE ≤ 793 GAL 

Class II/III 

Pallet  1 high 

9.1 

Class II/III 

Pallet  2 high 

9.1 

Class II/III 

Note: 

Rack

1 

7.6 

9.1 

K11.2/
HT/SR 
K11.2/
HT/SR 
K11.2/
OT/SR 

18.3 

278 

24.4 

278 

- 

- 

1250 

1500 

2000 

2500 

24.4 

270 

K8 

S - B 

2500 

2500 

1 - The aisle width must be minimum 2.4 meters & rack depth must be maximum 2.7 meters. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 637 of 1348 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

57. DESIGN CRITERIA 

FOR INDOOR 
STORAGE OF    
AEROSOL 

i.  Level 1 aerosol product shall be protected as a Class IV commodity. 
ii.  All other type of aerosol products shall be protected as per Table 9.7.JJ. 
iii. The in-rack sprinkler design shall be based on 8 sprinklers operation for one 

level of in-rack sprinkler, 12 sprinklers (6 at each top level) for two level of 
in-rack sprinklers, 18 sprinkler (6 at each top level) for more than two levels 
of in-rack sprinkler. The demand per in-rack sprinkler shall be 30 gpm for 
cartoned Storage and 45 gpm for non-cartoned Storage. 

iv. Plastic aerosol containers shall be limited to level 1 aerosol and aerosol with 

capacity less than 118 ml. 

v.  Encapsulated storage shall be treated as non-cartoned storage.  
vi. Shrink wrapping of carton shall be protected as cartoned storage.  
vii. Refer to Table 9.7.KK. For Sprinkler layouts and Schemes. 

Table 9.7.JJ.: Sprinkler Design criteria for Storage of Aerosols 

Aero-
sol 
Level 

Ceiling 
Height 
m 

Storage 
Height 
m 

Ceiling Sprinkler 

Inrack Sprinkler  Pump Capacity 

Sprinkler 

Design 
Densi-
ty 
mm/
min 

De-
sign 
Area 
m2 

Mini-
mum 
Pres-
sure 

Num-
ber of 
Sprin-
klers 

Sprin-
kler 

Lay-
out 

With-
out 
Hy-
drant 
gpm 

With 
Hy-
drant 
gpm 

CARTONED AEROSOLS IN PALLETIZED / SOLID PILE STORAGE CONFIGURATION 

2 

2 

2 
3 

3 

9.1 

9.1 

7.6 
9.1 

9.1 

4.6 

1.5 

6.1 
4.6 

1.5 

K 14  ESFR 
K ≥8.0/SR/

HT 

K 14 /ESFR 
K 14 /ESFR 
K ≥8.0/SR/

HT 

- 

12 

- 
- 

- 

3.4 

232 

- 

- 
- 

3.4 
5.2 

25 

232 

- 

12 

- 

12 
12 

- 

- 

- 

- 
- 

- 

7.6 

4.6 

K 14 /ESFR 

- 
UNCARTONED AEROSOLS IN PALLETIZED / SOLID PILE STORAGE CONFIGURATION 
- 
- 

K 14 /ESFR 
K 14 /ESFR 

5.2 
3.4 

9.1 
7.6 

3 

2 
2 

3.4 

12 

4.6 
4.6 

- 

- 
- 

- 

- 
- 

12 
12 

CARTONED AEROSOLS IN RACK STORAGE CONFIGURATION 

2 

2 

2 

2 
3 

3 

3 

All 

7.6 

9.1 

9.1 

9.1 
7.6 

9.1 

9.1 

All 

6.1 

7.6 

6.1 

4.6 
4.6 

7.6 

4.6 

All 

K 14 /ESFR 

K 14/ ESFR 

K ≥8.0/SR/

HT 

K 14 /ESFR 
K 14 /ESFR 

K 14 /ESFR 

K 14 /ESFR 
K ≥8.0/SR/

HT 

- 

- 

- 

- 

3.4 

3.4 

12 

232 

- 

- 
- 

- 

- 

- 
- 

- 

- 

3.4 
3.4 

3.4 

5.2 

12 

232 

- 

12 

12 

- 

12 
12 

12 

12 

- 

- 

K5.6/
QR/OT 
K5.6/
QR/OT 

- 
- 

K5.6/
QR/OT 

- 

- 

- 
- 

- 

- 

- 
- 

- 

1250 

1500 

1000 

1250 

1250 
1500 

1500 
2000 

2000 

2000 

1250 

1500 

1500 
1250 

2000 
1500 

1250 

1500 

L - 1 

2000 

2500 

L - 1 

1500 

2000 

- 
- 

1250 
1250 

1500 
1500 

L - 1 

2000 

2500 

- 

- 

1500 

2000 

K5.6/
QR/OT 

L - 8 

1500 

2000 

 
SR - Standard Response, FR - Fast Response, OT - Ordinary Temperature, HT - High Temperature, ESFR - Early Sup-
pression Fast Response,  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 638 of 1348 

 

Table 9.7.JJ.: Sprinkler Design criteria for Storage of Aerosols 

Aero-
sol 
Level 

Ceiling 
Height 
m 

Storage 
Height 
m 

Ceiling Sprinkler 

Inrack Sprinkler  Pump Capacity 

Sprinkler 

Design 
Densi-
ty 
mm/
min 

De-
sign 
Area 
m2 

Mini-
mum 
Pres-
sure 

Num-
ber of 
Sprin-
klers 

Sprin-
kler 

Lay-
out 

With-
out 
Hy-
drant 
gpm 

With 
Hy-
drant 
gpm 

UNCARTONED AEROSOLS IN RACK STORAGE CONFIGURATION 

2 

2 

3 

9.1 

9.1 

9.1 

4.6 

7.6 

7.6 

K 14 /ESFR 
K ≥8.0/SR/

HT 

K ≥8.0/SR/

HT 

- 

12 

12 

- 

5.2 

12 

- 

- 

1500 

2000 

232 

232 

- 

- 

- 

- 

K5.6/
QR/OT 
K5.6/
QR/OT 

L - 9 

1500 

2000 

L - 9 

1500 

2000 

ALL TYPE OF COOKING SPRAY PRODUCTS FOR ALL STORAGE CONFIGURATIONS 

- 

9.1 

7.6 

K 14 / ESFR 

  

  

5.2 

12 

- 

- 

1500 

2000 

SR - Standard Response, FR - Fast Response, OT - Ordinary Temperature, HT - High Temperature, ESFR - Early 
Suppression Fast Response,  
Refer to Table 9.7.KK. For Sprinkler layouts and Schemes. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 639 of 1348 

 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

58. SPRINKLERS AND IN 

i.  Sprinklers and Inrack sprinklers schemes and layouts shall be in ac-

RACK SPRINKLERS 
SCHEMES AND LAYOUTS  

cordance with Table 9.7.KK. 

Table 9.7.KK.: Sprinkler and In rack sprinkler Schemes and Layouts 

SHEMES 

REQUIREMENTS 

SCHEMATIC 

1. SCHEME S-A  i.  The horizontal barrier shall be 10mm 

 

plywood or 22 gauge sheet metal. They 
shall be spaced as indicated in the figure. 
In-rack sprinkler shall be provided below 
each barrier level. 

ii.  Where adjacent rack bays are not dedi-
cated to storage of liquids, the barrier 
and in-rack sprinkler protection 
shall be extended at least 8 ft. (2.4 m) 
beyond the area devoted to liquid stor-
age including aisle. 

iii. In-rack sprinkler shall be ordinary tem-
perature and quick response type with 
minimum K Factor of 8.0. 

iv. In-rack sprinkler design shall be based on 
6 most remote sprinklers for one level of 
in-rack sprinkler or 4 most remote sprin-
klers for top 2 levels for two levels or 
more level of in-rack sprinklers.   

v.  Demand per sprinkler shall be 60 gpm  

i.  Horizontal barrier shall be 10 mm ply-
wood or 22 gauge sheet metal. They 
shall be spaced as indicated in the figure. 
ii.  In-rack sprinkler shall be provided below 

 

each barrier level. 

iii. Where adjacent rack bays are not dedi-
cated to storage of liquids, the barrier 
and in-rack sprinkler protection 
shall be extended at least 8 ft. (2.4 m) 
beyond the area devoted to liquid stor-
age including aisle. 

iv. In-rack sprinkler shall be ordinary tem-
perature and quick response type with 
minimum K Factor of 8.0. 

v.  In-rack sprinkler design shall be based on 
6 most remote sprinklers for one level of 
in-rack sprinkler or 4 most remote sprin-
klers for top 2 levels, if two levels or 
more level of in-rack sprinklers.  

vi. Demand per sprinkler shall be 60 gpm 

2. SCHEME S-B 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 640 of 1348 

 

Table 9.7.KK.: Sprinkler and In rack sprinkler Schemes and Layouts 

SHEMES 

REQUIREMENTS 

SCHEMATIC 

3. SCHEME S-C 

i.  Horizontal barrier shall be 10 mm ply-
wood or 22 gauge sheet metal. They 
shall be spaced as indicated in the figure. 
ii.  In-rack sprinkler shall be provided below 

 

each barrier level. 

iii. Where adjacent rack bays are not dedi-
cated to storage of liquids, the barrier 
and in-rack sprinkler protection 
shall be extended at least 8 ft. (2.4 m) 
beyond the area devoted to liquid stor-
age including aisle. 

iv. In-rack sprinkler shall be ordinary tem-
perature and quick response type with 
minimum K Factor of 8.0. 

v.  In-rack sprinkler design shall be based on 
6 most remote sprinklers for one level of 
in-rack sprinkler or 4 most remote sprin-
klers for top 2 levels, if two levels or 
more level of in-rack sprinklers.  

vi. Demand per sprinkler shall be 30 gpm.  

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 641 of 1348 

 

Table 9.7.KK.: Sprinkler and In rack sprinkler Schemes and Layouts 

SHEMES 

REQUIREMENTS 

SCHEMATIC 

4. LAYOUT L-1 

i.  The in-rack sprinkler configuration 

 

shall be as per the figure. 

ii.  The in-rack sprinkler calculation 

shall be for 8 sprinkler for one level 
of in-rack, 12 sprinklers, if two level 
of in-rack and 18 sprinklers if more 
than two level of in-rack.  

5. LAYOUT L-2 

i.  One line of in-rack sprinklers 6 ft. 

 

(1.8 m) above the floor and one 
line of in-rack sprinklers 12 ft. (3.6 
m) above the floor in the longitudi-
nal flue space, with sprinklers 
spaced not more than 10 ft. (3 m) 
on center.  

ii.  Sprinklers shall be vertically stag-

gered.  

6. LAYOUT L-3 

i.  One line of in-rack sprinklers in the 

 

longitudinal flue space at every 
storage level above the floor ex-
cept above the top tier, with sprin-
klers spaced not more than 10 ft. (3 
m) on center. 

ii.  Sprinklers shall be vertically stag-

gered, where more than one level 
of in-rack sprinklers is installed.  

7. LAYOUT L-4 

i.  One line of in-rack sprinklers in the 

 

longitudinal flue space at every 
other storage level, except above 
the top tier, beginning above the 
first storage level, with sprinklers 
spaced not more than 10 ft. (3 m) 
on center.  

ii.  Sprinklers shall be vertically stag-

gered, where more than one level 
of in-rack sprinklers is installed.  

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 642 of 1348 

 

Table 9.7.KK.: Sprinkler and In rack sprinkler Schemes and Layouts 

SHEMES 

REQUIREMENTS 

SCHEMATIC 

8. LAYOUT L-5 

9. LAYOUT L-6 

i.  One line of in-rack sprinklers in the lon-
gitudinal flue space at every storage lev-
el above the floor except above the top 
tier and face sprinklers at the first stor-
age level at each rack upright.  

ii.  In-rack sprinklers shall be spaced not 
more than 9 ft. (2.7 m) on center and 
shall be staggered vertically, where 
more than one level of in-rack sprinklers 
is installed.  

i.  One line of in-rack sprinklers in the lon-
gitudinal flue space at every other stor-
age level above the first storage level 
except the top tier and face sprinklers at 
the first storage level at each rack up-
right.  

ii.  In-rack sprinklers shall be spaced not 
more than 10 ft. (3 m) on center and 
shall be staggered vertically, where 
more than one level of in-rack sprinklers 
is installed.  

10. LAYOUT               

L-7 

i.  Based on the protection table and stor-
age arrangement this in-rack sprinkler 
arrangement shall be applicable.  

 

 

 

11. LAYOUT    

i.  The in-rack sprinkler configuration shall 

 

L-8 

be as per the figure. 

ii.  The in-rack sprinkler calculation shall be 
for 8 sprinklers, for one level of in-rack, 
12 sprinklers, for two level of in-rack and 
18 sprinklers for more than two level of 
in-rack. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 643 of 1348 

 

Table 9.7.KK.: Sprinkler and In rack sprinkler Schemes and Layouts 

SHEMES 

REQUIREMENTS 

SCHEMATIC 

12. LAYOUT    L-9 

i.  The in-rack sprinkler configuration 

 

shall be as per the figure. 

ii.  The in-rack sprinkler calculation shall 
be for 8 sprinklers, for one level of in
-rack, 12 sprinklers, if two levels of 
in-rack and 18 sprinklers if more 
than two levels of in-rack.  

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 644 of 1348 

3.   Details of Fire Protection Systems 

 
3.6.  Automatic Dry Sprinkler Systems 

 
3.6.1. 

 The requirements for Automatic Dry Sprinkler System material, design, installation 
shall be as per Table 9.8., Applicable Sprinkler requirements of Table 9.7. and the 
General Requirements of Table 9.3.   

Table 9.8: Automatic Dry Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. DEFINITION 

2. COMPO-
NENTS 

3. FIRE PUMP   

CAPACITY 

4. PIPES 

i.  A sprinkler system employing automatic sprinklers that are attached to a piping 
system containing air or nitrogen under pressure, the release of which (as from 
the opening of a sprinkler) permits the water pressure to open a valve known as a 
dry pipe valve, and the water then flows into the piping system and out the 
opened sprinklers.  

ii.  Freezers and Refrigerated spaces having an ambient temperature less than 4oC 

shall be provided with Dry Sprinkler Systems.  

i.  Fire Pumps, Controller, Fire Water Tank, Pipes, Fittings, Nitrogen/Air Supply , 

Sprinkler Heads, Isolation valves, Alarm Check valves (ACV), Floor Zone Control 
Valve (ZCV), Pressure gauge, Flow Switch, Test connection, Drains, Breeching inlet 
and Signs. 

i.  The fire pump set shall consist of 1 Electric driven pump, 1 diesel driven pump and 

1 electric Jockey pump, complete with controllers. 

ii.  The pump capacity shall be as per Section 4. 

i.  Where the sprinkler pipe passes through a wall or floor into the refrigerated 

space, a section of pipe arranged for removal shall be provided immediately inside 
the space. The removable length of the required pipe shall be a minimum of 762 
mm. 

ii.  The connection pipe from the air supply to the dry pipe valve shall not be less than 

15 mm in diameter and shall enter the system above the priming water level of 
the dry pipe valve. 

iii. The air supply piping shall be equipped with two easily removable supply lines at 

least 1.9 m long and at least 25.4 mm in diameter. 

5. PRESSURE 
GAUGES  

i.  The approved and Civil Defence listed Pressure gauges shall be installed                           
a. On the water side and air side of the dry pipe valve.                                                          
b. At the air receiver where one is provided.                                                                       
c. In each independent pipe from air supply to dry pipe system.                                   
d. At quick-opening devices 

6. SPRINKLERS 

7. DESIGN AREA 
AND DESIGN 
DENSITY. 

i.  Sprinklers shall be either listed dry type sprinklers or Upright Sprinklers. Standard 

or pendent sprinklers shall not be installed in Dry Systems. 

i.  The dry Sprinkler System Design area and the design densities shall be as per Ta-

ble 9.6.A. 

Table 9.8.A.: Design Area and Design Densities for Dry Sprinklers based on Occupancy Hazard 

HAZARD 

DESIGN DENSITY         
(mm/min) gpm/ft2 

AREA OF OPERATION 
( m2 ) Ft2 

WATER DEMAND ONLY 
FOR SPRINKLERS gpm 

1. Light Hazard  

2. Ordinary 1 Hazard  

(4.1) 0.10  

(6.1) 0.15  

3. Ordinary 2 Hazard  

(8.1.1) 0.20  

4. Extra Hazard Group 1  

(12.2) 0.30  

5. Extra Hazard Group 2 
 

(16.3) 0.40  

(181) 1950 

(181) 1950 

(181) 1950 

(300) 3250 

(300) 3250 

195 

290 

390 

975 

1300 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 645 of 1348 

 

Table 9.8.: Automatic Dry Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

8. SIZE OF THE 

DRY       
SPRINKLER   
SYSTEM 

i.  The system size shall be such that the initial water is discharged from the system 

test connection in not more than 60 seconds, starting at the normal air pressure on 
the system and at the time of the fully opened inspection test connection.  

9. GRIDDED      

i.  The dry pipe sprinkler system shall not be Gridded.  

SYSTEM 

10. LOCATION 

OF DRY 
PIPE 
VALVE 

3. AIR 

9. WATER      
DELIVERY  

HAZARD 

i.  The dry Sprinkler Valve shall not be located inside area where the temperature is 

below 40C. 

ii.  An indicating-type control valve for the operational testing of the system shall be 

provided on each sprinkler riser outside of the refrigerated space  

i.  Each dry pipe system shall have a dedicated and automatic air maintenance de-

vice. 

ii.  Air or nitrogen or other approved gas pressure shall be maintained on dry pipe 

systems throughout the year. 

iii.  The compressed air supply shall be from a source available at all times. 
iv.  Air or nitrogen supply for systems shall be one of the following.                                 

a. Air from the room with lowest temperature to reduce the moisture content.            
b. Air compressor/dryer package listed for the application utilizing an ambient air.         
c. Compressed nitrogen gas from cylinders used in lieu of compressed air 

v.  The air supply shall have a capacity capable of restoring normal air pressure in the 

system within 60 minutes. 

vi.  Each supply line shall be equipped with control valves located in the warm area. 
vii.  A check valve shall be installed in the air filling connection, and a listed or ap-
proved shutoff valve of either the renewable disc or ball valve type shall be in-
stalled on the supply side of this check valve and shall remain closed unless filling 
the system. 

viii. An approved relief valve shall be provided between the air supply and the shutoff 
valve and shall be set to relieve pressure no less than 10 psi (0.7 bar) in excess of 
system air pressure and shall not exceed the manufacturer’s limitations. 

ix.  The system air pressure shall be maintained in accordance with the instruction 

sheet furnished with the dry pipe valve, or shall be 20 psi (1.4 bar) in excess of the 
calculated trip pressure of the dry pipe valve, based on the highest normal water 
pressure of the system supply. 

x.  A check valve or other positive backflow prevention device shall be installed in the 

air supply to each system to prevent airflow or waterflow from one system to an-
other. 

xi.  A low air pressure alarm to a constantly attended location shall be in stalled. 

i.  Calculations for the dry pipe system water delivery shall be based on the hazard and 

shall comply with Table 9.8.B. 

Table 9.8.B.: Dry Pipe System Water Delivery 

NUMBER OF MOST REMOTE 
SPRINKLERS OPEN INITIALLY 

MAXIMUM TIME OF WATER  
DELIVERY 

1. Light Hazard  

2. Ordinary 1 Hazard  

3. Ordinary 2 Hazard  

4. Extra Hazard Group 1  

5. Extra Hazard Group 2 

 

1 

2 

2 

4 

4 

60 Seconds  

50 Seconds  

50 Seconds  

45 Seconds  

40 Seconds  

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 646 of 1348 

 

Figure 9.26: Typical Arrangement of Dry Sprinkler System for Refrigerated areas 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 647 of 1348 

3.7.  Automatic Pre-action System Sprinkler Systems 

 
3.7.1. 

 

 

 The requirements for Pre-action Automatic Sprinkler System material, design, in-
stallation shall be as per Table 9.9., Applicable Sprinkler requirements of Table 9.7. 
and the General Requirements of Table 9.3.   

Table 9.9: Automatic Pre-action Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. DEFINITION 

i.  A Pre-action System is a system which employs automatic and closed-type sprin-
kler heads connected to a piping system that contains air (either pressurized or 
non-pressurized), with a supplemental system of detection serving the same 
area as the sprinklers.  

ii.  These systems are typically used in applications where the accidental discharge 
of water would be catastrophic to the usage occupancy (for example; computer 
servers, lift machine rooms, telecommunications equipment, and high voltage 
electrical components).  

iii. Pre-action systems shall be any of the following types.                                                   

a. A single interlock system, which admits water to a sprinkler piping upon oper-
ation of detection devices.                                                                                                                
b. A double interlock system, which admits water to a sprinkler piping upon op-
eration of both detection devices and automatic sprinklers. 

2. COMPONENTS 

i.  Fire Pumps, Fire Water Tank, Pipes, Fittings, Nitrogen/Air Supply , Sprinkler 

Heads, Isolation valves, Pre-action Valve, Pressure gauge, Flow Switch, Test con-
nection, Drains, Breeching inlet, Signs. 

ii.  All components of pneumatic, hydraulic, or electrical systems shall be compati-

ble.  

3. FIRE PUMP   

CAPACITY 

4. PIPES 

5. VALVES 

6. PRESSURE 
GAUGES  

7. SPRINKLERS 

8. SIZE OF THE 

SYSTEM 

 

i.  The fire pump set shall consist of 1 Electric driven pump, 1 diesel driven pump 

and 1 electric Jockey pump, complete with controllers. 

ii.  The pump capacity shall be as per Section 4. 

i.  Where the sprinkler pipe passes through a wall or floor into the refrigerated 

space, a section of the pipe arranged for the removal shall be provided immedi-
ately inside the space. The removable length of the required pipe shall be a min-
imum of 762 mm. 

ii.  The connection pipe from the air supply to the dry pipe valve shall not be less 
than 15 mm in diameter and shall enter the system above the priming water 
level of the dry pipe valve. 

iii. The air supply piping shall be equipped with two easily removable supply lines 

at least 1.9 m long and at least 25.4 mm in diameter. 

i.  The automatic water control valve shall be provided with hydraulic, pneumatic, 
or mechanical manual means for an operation that is independent of the detec-
tion devices and of the sprinklers. 

i.  The approved and Civil Defence listed Pressure gauges shall be installed                           
a. Above and below the pre-action valve.                                                                                   
b. On air supply to the pre-action valve. 

i.  Sprinklers shall be either listed dry type sprinklers or Upright Sprinklers and Hor-

izontal sprinklers. 

i.  Not more than 1000 automatic sprinklers shall be controlled by one Single inter-

locked pre-action valve. 

ii.  Double interlocked System size shall be designed to deliver water to test the 

connection in no more than 60 seconds.  

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 648 of 1348 

 

Table 9.9: Automatic Pre-action Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

9. GRIDDED     

SYSTEM 

i.  The pre-action pipe sprinkler system shall not be Gridded.  

10. LOCATION OF          

i.  The pre-action Sprinkler Valve shall not be located inside area where tempera-

ture is below 40C. 

ii.  An indicating-type control valve for operational testing of the system shall be 
provided on each sprinkler riser outside of the refrigerated space, when refrig-
erated spaces are protected. 

i.  The fire detection and alarm system for the pre-action system shall comply with 

Chapter 8. Fire Detection and Alarm Systems. 

ii.  Detectors shall be of electric or pneumatic fixed temperature type with temper-

ature ratings less than those of the sprinklers. 

iii. Detection devices shall not be rate-of-rise type. 

i.  Each Pre-action system shall have a dedicated and automatic air maintenance 

device. 

ii.  Air, nitrogen or other approved gas pressure shall be maintained on dry pipe 

systems throughout the year. 

iii.  The compressed air supply shall be from a source available at all times. 
iv.  Air or nitrogen supply for systems shall be one of the following.                                 

a. Air from the room with the lowest temperature to reduce the moisture con-
tent.                                                                                                                                                    
b. Air compressor/dryer package listed for the application utilizing ambient air.         
c. Compressed nitrogen gas from cylinders used in lieu of compressed air 

v.  The air supply shall have a capacity capable of restoring normal air pressure in 

the system within 60 minutes. 

vi.  Each supply line shall be equipped with control valves located in the warm ar-

ea. 

vii.  A check valve shall be installed in the air filling connection, and a listed or ap-

proved shutoff valve of either the renewable disc or ball valve type shall be 
installed on the supply side of this check valve and shall remain closed unless 
filling the system. 

viii. An approved relief valve shall be provided between the air supply and the 

shutoff valve and shall be set to relieve pressure no less than 10 psi (0.7 bar) in 
excess of system air pressure and shall not exceed the manufacturer’s limita-
tions. 

ix.  All pre-action system shall maintain a minimum supervising air or nitrogen 

pressure of 7 psi (0.5 bar). 

x.  A check valve or other positive backflow prevention device shall be installed in 
the air supply to each system to prevent airflow or waterflow from one system 
to another. 

xi.  A low air pressure alarm to a constantly attended location shall be in stalled. 

PRE-ACTION 
SYSTEM 
VALVE 

11. FIRE             
DETECTION 
SYSTEM 

12. AIR 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 649 of 1348 

 

Figure 9.27: Typical Arrangement of Single Inter locked Pre-action System 

Figure 9.28: Typical Arrangement of Double Inter locked Pre-action System 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 650 of 1348 

3.8.  Deluge Water Spray Systems 

 
3.8.1. 

 

 

 The requirements for Deluge Water Spray System material, design, installation 
shall be as per Table 9.10., Applicable Sprinkler requirements of Table 9.7. and the 
General Requirements of Table 9.3.   

Table 9.10: Automatic Deluge Water Spray System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. DEFINITION 

2. COMPONENTS 

i.  A water spray system is a special fixed pipe system connected to a reliable sup-
ply of fire protection water and equipped with water spray nozzles for specific 
water discharge and distribution over the surface or area to be protected. The 
piping system is connected to a water supply through a deluge valve that can 
be actuated both automatically and manually to initiate the flow of water. Au-
tomatic system actuation valves for spray systems can be actuated electrically 
by the operation of automatic detection equipment, such as heat detectors, 
relay circuits, and gas detectors, or mechanically by hydraulic or pneumatic 
systems, depending on the operating mode of the individual valves.  

ii.   The Deluge System application could be to extinguish  fires, control burning, 
fire exposure protection (Cooling) or prevention of fire. The pattern of the wa-
ter spray discharged from spray nozzles onto a surface may be elliptical or Cir-
cular, and the cross section of the projected discharge is conical. The water 
spray is forcefully directed onto the object or surface being protected. The 
pattern of spray nozzle discharge must carry water spray over the distance be-
tween the nozzle and the target, compensate for wind and draft conditions, 
and effectively hit the surface to be protected. The required discharge density 
in gpm/ft2 (L/min/m2) and complete coverage of the area to be protected are 
also essential elements. 

iii. LPG Tanks, Flammable Gas/Liquid Tanks, Electrical Hazards such as transform-

ers, Oil switches, motors, cable trays/ Trenches, Service Tunnels, Transport 
Tunnels and other such hazards shall be provided with Deluge Water Spray Sys-
tem. 

i.  Fire Pumps, Controller, Fire Water Tank, Pipes, Fittings, Nitrogen/Air Supply , 

Spray Nozzles, Isolation valves, Deluge Valve,  Pressure gauge, Flow Switch, 
Test connection, Drains, Breeching inlet and Signs. 

ii.  All components of pneumatic, hydraulic, or electrical systems shall be compati-

ble, listed and approved by Civil Defence. 

iii. System components shall be rated for the maximum working pressure to which 

they are exposed, but not less than 12.1 bar (175 psi). 

3. FIRE PUMPS 

i.  The fire pump set shall consist of 1 Electric driven pump, 1 diesel driven pump 

and 1 electric Jockey pump, complete with controllers. 

ii.  The pump capacity shall be as per Section 4. 

4. WATER SPRAY 

NOZZLES 

i.  Nozzles shall be open, listed and approved. 
ii.  Selection of nozzles shall be based on discharge characteristics, hazard evalua-
tion, ambient conditions and manufacturer’s instructions regarding positioning 
and coverage. 

5. DELUGE VALVE 

i.  The deluge System actuation valve shall be located as close to hazard protected 

as possible upon evaluation of hazard factors such as radiant heat flux, poten-
tial explosions, accessibility, discharge time and, drainage arrangement such as 
dikes, bund walls, trenches etc. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 651 of 1348 

 

Table 9.10: Automatic Deluge Water Spray System  

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

6. ELECTRICAL 
CLEARANCE 

i.  All system components shall be located so as to maintain the minimum electrical 
clearances from live parts. The clearance distance shall comply with Table 9.10.A. 

Table 9.10.A.: Clearance from Water Spray Equipment to Live Uninsulated Electrical Component 

NOMINAL SYSTEM 
VOLTAGE 
kV 

1. Up to 13.8  

2. 23  

3. 34.5  

4. 46  

5. 69 

6. 115 

7.138 

8. 161 

9. 230 

10. 345 

11. 500 

12. 765 

MAXIMUM SYSTEM 
VOLTAGE 
kV 

DESIGN BASIC IMPULSE 
LEVEL (BIL) 
kV 

MNIMUM CLEARANCE OF 
WWATER SPRAY        
EQUIPMENT 

14.5 

24.3 

36.5 

48.3 

72.5 

121 

145 

169 

242 

362 

550 

800 

110 

150 

200 

250 

350 

550 

650 

750 

178 mm 

254 mm 

330 mm 

432 mm 

635 mm 

1067 mm 

1270 mm 

1473 mm 

900/ 1050 

1050/ 1300 

1500/1800 

2050 

1930 mm/ 2134 mm 

2134 mm/ 2642 mm 

3150 mm/ 3658 mm 

4242 mm 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 652 of 1348 

Table 9.10: Automatic Deluge Water Spray System  

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

7. PIPING    

SUPPORT 

i.  The system piping shall be supported to maintain its integrity under fire conditions. 
ii.  The piping shall be supported from steel or concrete structural members or pipe 

stands. 

iii. Pipe stands used to support piping shall be in accordance with Table 9.10.B to deter-

mine maximum heights for pipe stands supporting various diameters of looped piping. 

iv. The distance between stands shall be as per Table 9.10.C. 
v.  Pipe stands shall be constructed of Schedule 40 threaded pipe, malleable iron flange 

base, and shall have a threaded cap top. 

vi. Pipe stands shall be anchored to a concrete pier or footing with either drop-in an-

chors, quick bolts, or cast-in-place J hooks. 

vii. The piping shall be attached to the pipe stand with U-bolts or equivalent attachment. 
viii.The piping shall be supported and braced to restrict movement due to nozzle reac-

tion and water surges so that system performance and integrity is maintained. 

ix. Hangers shall comply with Table 9.7.30. 

Table 9.10.B.: Maximum Pipe stand Heights 

DIAMETER OF 
PIPE 

PIPE STAND 
DIAMETER 
40 mm 

PIPE STAND 
DIAMETER 
50 mm 
 

PIPE STAND DI-
AMETER 
65 mm 

PIPE STAND 
DIAMETER 
80 mm 

PIPE STAND DI-
AMETER 
100 mm 

1. 40 mm  

2. 50 mm 

3. 65 mm 

4. 80 mm 

5. 100 mm 

LOOP SIZE 

1. 25 mm  

2. 40 mm 

3. 50 mm 

4. 65 mm 

3048 mm 

2438 mm 

1829 mm 

 

 

4267 mm 

3658 mm 

3048 mm 

2438 mm 

 

5486 mm 

4876 mm 

4267 mm 

3658 mm 

 

8534 mm 

7925 mm 

7315 mm 

6705 mm 

 

9144 mm 

9144 mm 

9144 mm 

9144 mm 

3048 mm 

Table 9.10.C.: Pipe Stand Distance 

DISTANCE BETWEEN PIPE STANDS 

3048 mm 

3658 mm 

4267 mm 

4572 mm 

 

Figure 9.30: Typical Arrangement of Support legs for Pipe Stands 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 653 of 1348 

 

Table 9.10: Automatic Deluge Water Spray System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

8. DRAINAGE 

i.  All water spray system pipe and fittings shall be installed so that the system can 

be drained. 

ii.  Drains shall discharge to a safe location, and drain valves, where provided, shall 

be accessible. 

iii. Drains shall not be directly interconnected with any sewer systems. 

9. FIRE DETECTION 

AND ALARM 
SYSTEM 

i.  The selection, location, and spacing of automatic fire detectors for the actuation 

of fixed water spray systems shall comply with Chapter 8. Fire Detection and 
Alarm Systems. 

ii.  The detection equipment requiring protection from the weather shall be provid-

ed with a canopy, hood, or other suitable protection. 

iii. Detectors shall be located so that no portion of the hazard being protected ex-

tends beyond the perimeter line of detectors. 

iv. When located out of doors or in the open, the spacing of fixed temperature or 

rate-of-rise detectors shall be reduced by at least 50 percent from the listed 
spacing under smooth ceilings. 

v.  Any flow from a single automatic nozzle of the smallest orifice size installed on 

the system or flow from any group of nonautomatic nozzles, shall result in an 
audible alarm on the premises within 90 seconds after flow begins. 

vi. Where a separate detection system is used to activate the water spray system, 
the alarm shall be actuated independently of the system water flow to indicate 
the operation of the detection system. 

vii. The flammable gas detectors and radiant energy sensing fire detectors shall be 

installed as per their listing specifications. 

i.  Where pilot sprinklers are used for fire detection in indoor locations, the maxi-

mum horizontal spacing shall not exceed 3.7 m. 

ii.  Pilot sprinklers located outdoors, such as in open process structures, shall be 

spaced such that the elevation of a single level of pilot sprinklers and between 
additional levels of pilot sprinklers shall not exceed 5.2 m. 

iii. The horizontal distance between pilot sprinklers installed outdoors shall not 

exceed 2.5 m. 

iv. Pilot sprinklers shall be installed as per their listing specifications in special situa-

tions. 

i.  At least one manual actuation device independent of the manual actuation de-

vice at the system actuation valve shall be installed for all automatic systems 
installed in occupied areas. 

i.  Breeching inlet connections shall be provided for all water spray systems, except 

for ultra high-speed water spray systems. 

i.  Pressure gauges shall be installed  below and above the Deluge Valve, below the 

system actuation valve and on air or water supply to pilot lines.  

i.  Strainers shall be provided for all water spray systems so as to be accessible for 

cleaning and flushing. 

10. PILOT        

SPRINKLERS 

11. REMOTE 

MANUAL   
ACTIVATION 

12. BREECHING 

INLET 

13. GAUGES 

14. STRAINERS  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 654 of 1348 

 

Table 9.10: Automatic Deluge Water Spray System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

15. DESIGN 

i.  The system and water supplies shall be designed to admit water into the piping and 

to discharge effective water spray from all open nozzles without delay. 
ii.  Tapping from wet risers to feed deluge system shall not be permitted. 
iii.  Manual operation shall be permitted where automatic operation of the system pre-

sents a hazard to personnel and trained personnel are available to operate such 
manual systems. 

iv.  Nozzle spacing (vertically or horizontally) shall not exceed 3 m. 
v.  A single system shall not protect more than one fire area. 
vi.  The hydraulically designed discharge rate for a single system or multiple systems 
designed to operate simultaneously shall not exceed the available water supply.  

vii.  Extinguishment of fires by water spray shall be accomplished by one or a combina-

tion of the following methods:                                                                                                                   
a. Surface cooling     b. Smothering by produced steam          c. Emulsification                                                                                                                                      
d. Dilution                  e. Other factors 

viii. Design Densities for various hazards, when demanded by other sections of this code 

or by Civil Defence hazard evaluation shall be as per Table 9.10.D. The duration of 
Discharge shall not be less than 60 minutes. 

ix.  All Deluge Water Spray Systems shall be hydraulically designed along with the manu-

facturer’s instructions. 

Table 9.10.D.: Water Spray Design Densities and Criteria 

HAZARD, 

REQUIRED DESIGN  
DENSITY 

OTHER REQUIREMENTS 

1. Cable - Spread/ Trenches/

Trays/Cable runs 

12.2 lpm (0.30 gpm)  Air Sampling Type smoke detection for smol-

dering fire sensing shall be provided. 

2. Belt Conveyors 

10.2 lpm (0.25 gpm) 

3. Conveyor Belt 

10.2 lpm (0.25 gpm) 

 

 

4. Pumps, Compressors han-
dling Flammable Liquids 

5. Flammable Liquid pool fires 

6. Vessels Exposure protection 

(LPG/ Flammable Liquid/ 
Gas Tanks,  

7. Structural Steel Exposure 

protection 

8. Vertical Structural Steel    

Exposure protection 

Interlocks shall be provided between the de-
tection system and the machinery to shut 
down belt conveyor operation, including up-
stream feed. 

The water spray system shall be installed to 
automatically wet the top belt, its contents, 
and the bottom return belt. 

See Chapter 13. Flammable Liquids 

See Chapter 13. Flammable Liquids 

10.2 lpm (0.25 gpm)  Water spray shall be applied to top and 

4.1 lpm (0.10 gpm) 

bottom surfaces of vertical vessels. See also 
Chapter 13. Flammable Liquids 

Horizontal, stressed (primary) structural steel 
members shall be protected. 

10.2 lpm (0.25 gpm)  A vertical structural steel that has been en-
cased in fire-resistant insulating material to 
provide a desired level of fire resistance, does 
not need not be protected with a water spray 
system. 

9. Transformers 

10.2 lpm (0.25 gpm) 

The water shall be applied to a projected area 
of rectangular prism envelope for the trans-
former and its appurtenances. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 655 of 1348 

Table 9.10: Automatic Deluge Water Spray System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

16. WATER 

DEMAND 

i.  The water supply must be adequate to supply the operating water spray system(s) 
with the required gpm (L/min) at effective pressure. Water spray systems adjacent 
to the hazard initially protected may require additional water. 

ii.  The water supply should be able to supply hose streams simultaneously. The total 
required water supply pressure and flow rates should be considered when the sys-
tem is designed.  

iii. The duration of the required discharge varies according to the nature of the hazard, 
the purpose for which the system is designed, and other factors that can be evaluat-
ed only for each installation.  

 

Figure 9.31.: Typical Deluge Water Spray System Application for LPG Tank. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 656 of 1348 

3.9.  Foam Sprinkler/Deluge/Discharge Systems 

 
3.9.1. 

 The requirements for Foam Sprinkler/ Deluge/ Discharge System material, design, 
installation shall be as per Table 9.11., Applicable Sprinkler requirements of Table 
9.7. and the General Requirements of Table 9.3.   

Table 9.11: Foam Sprinkler/ Deluge/ Pourer System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. DEFINITION 

2. COMPONENTS 

i.  Foam is produced by mixing a foam concentrate with water at the appropriate 
concentration, and then aerating and agitating the solution to form the bubble 
structure. Some foams are thick and viscous and form tough and, heat-resistant 
blankets over burning liquid surfaces and vertical areas. Other foams are thin-
ner and spread more rapidly. Some foams are capable of producing a vapor-
sealing film of surface-active water solution on a liquid surface. Some, such as 
medium- or high-expansion foam, are meant to be used as large volumes of 
wet gas cells for inundating surfaces and filling cavities. 

ii.  The process of producing and applying fire-fighting air-foams to hazards re-

quires three separate operations, each of which consumes energy.                                         
a. The proportioning process                                                                                                 
b. The foam generation phase                                                                                               
c. The distribution method. 

iii. Foam agent can be discharged through various arrangement of Systems such as 
Foam-water Sprinkler Systems, Foam-water Deluge  Spray Systems, Foam pour-
ing System, Foam monitor Systems etc. See Section  1.5 for definitions. 

i.  Fire Pumps, Controller, Foam concentrate pumps, Fire Water Tank, Foam con-
centrate Bladder Tank, Foam proportioning System, Pipes, Fittings, Sprinklers/
Spray Nozzles, Isolation valves, Deluge Valve,  Pressure gauge, Flow Switch, Test 
connection, Drains, Breeching inlet and Signs. 

ii.  All the components of Foam Systems including the used water shall be compati-

ble with the foam concentrate and foam solution and listed and approved by 
Civil Defence. 

iii. All foam solutions and type of systems applied to hazard shall be as per the 

manufacturer’s specifications and Material Safety Data Sheet. 

iv. The System components shall be rated for the maximum working pressure to 

which they are exposed, but not less than 12.1 bar (175 psi). 

3. FIRE PUMPS 

i.  The fire Pump set shall consist of 1 Electric driven pump, 1 diesel driven pump 

and 1 electric Jockey pump, complete with controllers. 

ii.  The pump capacity shall be as per Section 4. 

4. FOAM           

CONCENTRATE 

i.  Foam concentrates shall be from single manufacturer and single composition. 

Foam concentrates from different manufacturers, or different brands of the 
same manufacturer shall not be mixed. 

ii.  Storage tanks material, methods, storage temperature and other specifications 

shall be as per the manufacturer’s instructions. 

iii. Water-soluble and certain flammable and combustible liquids and polar sol-

vents that are destructive to nonalcohol-resistant foams shall require the use of 
alcohol-resistant foams.  

5. FOAM SYSTEM 

LOCATION  

i.  Foam equipment, proportioner, pumps, control valves shall be as close to haz-

ard they are protecting as possible, without compromising the safety of the 
equipment and of the personnel operating such systems. 

6. FOAM       

STRAINERS 

i.  Civil Defence listed strainers, having perforations not larger than  the smallest 
spray orifice and not less than 3.2 mm shall be installed , so as to be accessible 
for cleaning and flushing while maintaining the system discharge during activa-
tion. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 657 of 1348 

 

Table 9.11: Foam Sprinkler/ Deluge/ Pourer System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

7. TEST              

CONNECTIONS 

i.  System test connections shall be sized to accommodate both the low flow of the 

proportioner and the maximum anticipated flow through the proportioner. 

8. LOW                    

EXPANSION 
FOAM 

 
ALSO SEE TABLE 

i.  Design criteria for above the surface application with fixed foam discharge out-

let for Fixed-Roof Storage tanks containing Hydrocarbons shall comply with 
Table 9.11.A  and Table 9.11.E.  

 

9.11.13.,                  
DESIGN                      
CRITERIA  

9. FOAM WATER 

SPRINKLER 

10.  FOAM 

HANDLINE 
AND                    
MONITOR 
PROTECTION 

i.  Design densities, design area and duration of foam water sprinkler and foam 
water spray applications for indoor storage of water miscible liquids with con-
centration ≤ 50% and Immiscible Liquids in metal container, shall be as per   
Table 9.11.B.  

ii.  For in-rack sprinkler layout and schemes in Table 9.11.B  refer to Table 9.7.KK  
iii.  Design criteria for Foam water sprinkler system for processes and activities 

handling flammable and combustible liquids shall comply with Table 9.11.C.  

i.  Design criteria for Foam Handline and Monitor protection for Fixed-Roof Stor-

age tanks containing Hydrocarbons shall comply with Table 9.11.D.  

ii.  Foam Monitor nozzles shall not be considered as the primary means of protec-

tion for fixed-roof tanks over 18 m (60 ft.) in diameter.  

iii.  Foam handlines shall not be permitted to be used as the primary means of pro-
tection for fixed-roof tanks over 9 m (30 ft.) in diameter or those over 6 m (20 
ft.) in height.  

iv.  The design Criteria of Foam Monitor System for Loading Racks (Truck or Rail 

cars at loading and unloading) shall comply with Table 9.11.G.  

Table 9.11.A.: Discharge Time and Application Rate for Type II Fixed Foam Discharge Outlet of Outdoor 

Aboveground Storage Tank Containing Hydrocarbon  

HAZARD 

1. Fixed roof storage tank contain-

ing hydrocarbon with flash 
point below 37°C or liquids 
heated above their flash point.  

2. Fixed roof storage tank contain-

ing hydrocarbon with flash 
point between 37.8°C and 60°C 
(100°F and 140°F).  

REQUIRED  DESIGN                      
DENSITY 
 

DESIGN       
AREA 
m2 

ADDITIONAL 
FOAM FOR         
HYDRAULIC 
IMBALANCE 

FOAM             
CAPACITY 
DURATION 

4.1 lpm  
(0.10 gpm) 

Entire tank 
surface 

10% 

55 minutes 

4.1 lpm  
(0.10 gpm) 

Entire tank 
surface 

10% 

30 minutes 

3.  Fixed roof storage tank contain-

ing crude petroleum.  

4.1 lpm 
 (0.10 gpm) 

Entire tank 
surface 

10% 

55 minutes 

4. Floating roof storage tank con-

taining hydrocarbon.  

Follow NFPA 11 

Follow             
NFPA 11 

Follow               
NFPA 11 

Follow             
NFPA 11 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 658 of 1348 

 

Table 9.11.B.: Design Criteria for Foam Water Sprinkler/Deluge/Spray Systems For Indoor Storage of 
Water Miscible Liquids with more than 50% concentration and Immiscible Liquids in Metal Container 

Storage 

Type 

Storage 
Height 

m 

Ceiling 
Height 

m 

Foam Water Sprinkler System  

Pump Capacity 

Design Criteria 

Ceiling 

Sprinkler 

Design 
Density 

gpm 

Design 

Area 
m2 

In-rack 
Layout 

Without 
Hydrant 

gpm 

With  

Hydrant 

gpm 

NON-RELIEVING TYPE CONTAINER OF SIZE ≤ 5 GAL. STORING CLASS IB / IC/II/IIIA 
Rack 

12.2 

186 

L-3 

1250  

1500 

7.6 

9.1 

Palletized 

3.4 

9.1 

K ≥8.0/QR/HT 
K ≥11.2/QR/
HT 

16.3 

278 

- 

1500  

1500  

RELIEVING TYPE CONTAINER OF SIZE ≤ 5 GAL. STORING CLASS IB / IC/II/IIIA 
Rack 

K ≥8.0/QR/HT 

12.2 

186 

7.6 

9.1 

L-4 

1250  

1500  

NON-RELIEVING TYPE CONTAINER OF SIZE >5 & ≤60 GAL. STORING CLASS IB / IC/II/IIIA 
Rack 

K ≥8.0/SR/HT 

12.2 

278 

L-3 

7.6 

9.1 

Palletized 

1.9 

9.1 

K ≥8.0/SR/HT 

12.2 

278 

- 

RELIEVING TYPE CONTAINER OF SIZE >5 & ≤60 GAL. STORING CLASS IB / IC/II/IIIA 
Rack 

K ≥8.0/SR/HT 

12.2 

278 

7.6 

9.1 

L-4 

Palletized 

Palletized 

1.9 

4.1 

9.1 

10 

K ≥8.0/SR/HT 

K ≥11.2/SR/HT 

12.2 

24.2 

278 

278 

- 

- 

RELIEVING & NON-RELIEVING TYPE CONTAINER OF SIZE ≤60 GAL. STORING CLASS IIIB 
Rack 

K ≥8.0/SR/HT 

12.2 

15.2 

12.2 

186 

L-4 

1500  

1250  

1500  

1250  

2000  

2000  

1500  

2000  

1500  

2500  

1250  

1500  

RELIVING TYPE PORTABLE TANK & IBC 
Rack 

7.6 

9.1 

K ≥8.0/SR/HT 

12.2 

278 

L-4 

1500  

2000  

2 High 

Pelletized 
Note:  
i.  The in-rack sprinkler design shall be based on the 8 most remote sprinklers for one level of in-rack 

K ≥8.0/SR/HT 

1250 G 

1500  

12.2 

278 

9.1 

- 

sprinklers or 6 most remote sprinklers for top 2 levels if two levels of in-rack sprinklers or 6 most 
remote sprinklers for top 3 levels if three or more level of in-rack sprinklers.  

ii.  The demand per in-rack sprinkler shall be 30 gpm.  
iii.  The in-rack sprinkler shall be K 5.6 quick response (QR) ordinary temperature type.  
iv.  For in-rack sprinkler layout and schemes refer to Table 9.7.KK. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 659 of 1348 

 

HAZARD 

Table 9.11.C.: Design Criteria for Foam Water Sprinkler for processes and activities                                

handling flammable and combustible Liquids 

DESIGN 
REQUIRED  
DESIGN                      
AREA 
m2 
DENSITY 
 

FOAM 
CONCEN-
TRATE 
DURATION 

PUMP           
CAPACITY 
WITHOUT            
HYDRANT 
gpm 

PUMP    
CAPACITY 
WITH              
HYDRANT 
gpm 

1. LOADING AND UNLOADING AREA 

2. INDOOR STORAGE OF LIQUIDS IN 
ATMOSPHERIC STORAGE TANKS  

3.  SPRAY APPLICATION USING   

FLAMMABLE COMBUSTIBLE        
LIQUIDS 

4. POWDER COATING APPLICATION 

6.1 lpm  
(0.16 gpm) 

12.2 lpm  
(0.35 gpm) 

6.1 lpm  
(0.16 gpm) 

6.1 lpm  
(0.16 gpm) 

465 m2 

15 Minutes  1000 

1250  

465 m2 

15 Minutes  1500  

2000 

465 m2 

15 Minutes  1000 

1250  

465 m2 

15 Minutes  1000 

1250  

5. AIRCRAFT HANGER  (REFER TO  

TABLE 9.27.17) 

REFER TO NFPA 
409 AND TABLE 
9.27.17. 

 

 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 660 of 1348 

 

Table 9.11: Foam Sprinkler/ Deluge/ Pourer System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

11. DRAINAGE 

i.  Facilities shall be provided for the safe removal or retention of the largest antici-
pated flammable liquid spill plus the free water reaching the floor from the fixed 
fire protection system, as well as the discharge from hose streams.  

12. PRECAUTION 

13. FOAM         

WATER   
SPRINKLER, 
PRE-ACTION, 
DRY PIPE 
SYSTEM 

i.  Application of foam through solid streams that plunge into the flammable liquid 

could result as the source of ignition of the ensuing fire. The ignitions could be 
because of static discharges resulting from splashing and turbulence. Therefore, 
any application of foam to an unignited flammable liquid should be as gentle as 
possible. Correct application methods include a spray pattern or banking the 
foam stream off a backboard so that the foam flows gently onto the liquid sur-
face.  

ii.  Foam solutions are conductive and therefore not recommended for use on elec-
trical fires. If foam is used, a spray is less conductive than a straight stream. How-
ever, because foam is cohesive and contains materials that allow water to con-
duct electricity, foam spray is more conductive than water spray. 

i.  The system piping shall be hydraulically designed to obtain reasonably uniform 

foam and water distribution and to allow for loss of head in system piping. 

ii.  Sprinkler spacing shall not exceed 9.3 m2  per sprinkler. 
iii. The spacing between the branch line shall not exceed 3.7 m2. 
iv. The temperature rating of the sprinklers shall be within the range of 121°C to 

149°C (250°F to 300°F) where they are located at the roof or ceiling.  

v.  Where sprinklers are located at an intermediate level, the temperature rating 

shall be within the range of 57°C to 77°C (135°F to 170°F), unless ambient condi-
tions require a higher rating.  

vi. A minimum of 3% foam-water solution shall be discharged. 
vii.The foam sprinkler system shall also comply with Section 3.5. Wet Sprinkler Sys-

tem. 

viii.The foam pre-action sprinkler System shall also comply with Section 3.7. Pre-

action Sprinkler System. 

ix. The foam dry sprinkler system shall also comply with Section 3.6. Dry Sprinkler 

System. 

x.  The foam system shall  have a provision for manual operation. 

Figure 9.33.: Typical Foam Water Sprinkler System for Diesel Generator Room 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 661 of 1348 

 

Table 9.11: Foam Sprinkler/ Deluge/ Pourer System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

14. FOAM WATER     

DELUGE          
SYSTEM 

i.  The foam Water Deluge System shall comply with Section 3.8. Deluge Water 

Spray System. 

ii.  The system piping shall be hydraulically designed to obtain a reasonably uni-
form foam and water distribution and to allow for the loss of head in water 
supply piping. 

iii. an automatic Fire detection in compliance with Chapter 8. Fire Detection and 
Alarm System shall be used for fixed systems except for certain outdoor situa-
tions where manually triggered systems can be acceptable based on hazard 
evaluation.  

iv. A minimum of 3% foam-water solution shall be discharged. 
v.  A piping carrying foam solution shall be sized as if carrying plain water. 
vi. The foam Water Deluge System shall  have provision for manual operation. 

Figure 9.34.: Typical Foam Water Deluge System for Flammable Liquid Storage 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 662 of 1348 

 

Table 9.11: Foam Sprinkler/ Deluge/ Pourer System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

15. DESIGN                     

i.  Design Criteria for above the surface application with fixed foam discharge 

CRITERIA FOR 
LOW –
EXPANSION 
FOAM SYSTEM 

outlet for Fixed-Roof Storage tanks containing Hydrocarbons shall comply with 
Table 9.11.A  and Table 9.11.E.  

ii.  Low-expansion foam shall be provided to protect outdoor storage tanks, interi-
or flammable liquid hazards, loading racks, diked areas and non-diked spill are-
as. 

iii. Foam Monitor nozzles shall not be considered as the primary means of protec-

tion for fixed-roof tanks over 18 m (60 ft.) in diameter. 

iv. Foam handlines shall not be permitted to be used as the primary means of 

protection for fixed-roof tanks over 9 m (30 ft.) in diameter or those over 6 m 
(20 ft.) in height. 

v.  Fixed foam outlets shall not be used to protect horizontal or pressure tanks. 
vi. For the protection of a flammable liquid contained in a vertical fixed-roof 

(cone) atmospheric storage tank, discharge outlets shall be attached to the 
tank. 

vii. Where two or more discharge outlets are required, the outlets shall be spaced 

equally around the periphery of the tank, individually piped and separately 
valved for isolation outside the dike area. 

viii.Fixed foam discharge outlets shall be attached at the top of the shell and shall 

be located or connected to preclude the possibility of the tank contents over-
flowing into the foam lines. 

ix. Fixed foam discharge outlets shall be provided with a seal, frangible under low 

pressure, to prevent entrance of vapors into foam outlets and pipelines. 

x.  Fixed foam discharge outlets shall be provided with inspection means to allow 

maintenance and for inspection and replacement of vapor seals. 

Table 9.11.D.: Foam Handline and Monitor for Fixed Roof Hydrocarbon Tanks 

HAZARD 

REQUIRED DESIGN  
DENSITY          
(MINIMUM             
APPLICATION RATE) 

FOAM      
ADDITION 
FOR         
HYDRAULIC 
IMBALANCE 

DURATION 

1. Class II Hydrocarbons 

2. Class I Hydrocarbons and Hydrocarbons heated 

above their Flash Points 

3. Crude Oil and Liquid with Boil Over Characteristics 

6.5 lpm/m2                      
(1.06 gpm/ ft2) 
6.5 lpm/m2                      
(1.06 gpm/ ft2) 
6.5 lpm/m2                      
(1.06 gpm/ ft2) 

10% 

10% 

10% 

50 Minutes 

65 Minutes 

65 Minutes 

Table 9.11.E.: Required Number of Fixed Foam Discharge Outlets for Fixed Roof Hydrocarbon Tanks 

TANK DIAMETER OR EQUIVALENT AREA 

MINIMUM NUMBER OF FOAM DISCHARGE   
OUTLETS 

1. Up to 24 m 

2. Over 24 m - 36 m 

3. Over 36 m - 42 m 

4. Over 42 m - 48 m 

5. Over 48 m - 54 m 

6. Over 54 m - 60 m 

7. Over 60 m 

 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 
6, Plus 1 outlet for each additional 462 m2 area 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 663 of 1348 

 
 
ITEMS 

Table 9.11: Foam Sprinkler/ Deluge/ Pourer System Requirements 

REQUIREMENTS 

15. DESIGN                     

xi.    Design Criteria of Subsurface application of Foam protection for Fixed-Roof Stor-

CRITERIA 
FOR LOW –
EXPANSION 
FOAM   
SYSTEM 

age tanks containing Hydrocarbons shall comply with Table 9.11.F. 

xii.   Subsurface injection systems shall not be used for protection of Class IA hydrocar-

bon liquids or for the protection of alcohols, esters, ketones, aldehydes, anhy-
drides, or other products requiring the use of alcohol-resistant foams. 

xiii.   Foam concentrates and equipment for subsurface injection shall be listed. 
xiv.   Fluoroprotein foam, AFFF, and FFFP for subsurface injection shall have expansion 

ratios between 2:1 and 4:1. 

xv.    The foam velocity at the point of discharge into the tank contents shall not ex-

ceed 3 m/sec (10 ft./sec) for Class IB liquids or 6 m/sec (20 ft./sec) for other clas-
ses of liquids unless actual tests prove that higher velocities are satisfactory. 

xvi.   Where two or more outlets are required, they shall be located so that the foam 

travel on the surface cannot exceed 30 m (100 ft.). 

xvii. The number of  subsurface foam discharge outlets for fixed-roof storage tanks 

containing Hydrocarbons shall comply with Table 9.11.F. 

xviii.  A highly viscous liquid heated above 93°C lower initial application rated may be 
required to prevent frothover. Good judgment should be used in applying foam 
in tank containing hot oil, burning asphalt or burning liquid heated over 100°C. 

xix.  If due to type and quantity of discharge outlet the discharge rate is highly propor-

tionate, the reduction in the discharge period is permitted but shall be not less 
than 70%. 

xx.   The foam discharge outlet shall be elevated at least 0.3m above the highest wa-

ter level at the bottom. 

xxi.  The size and length of the pipe upstream of the foam maker shall be designed to 

limit the back pressure within the design condition of the equipment.  

Table 9.11.F.: Subsurface Foam Discharge Density, Number of Outlets for                                                             

Fixed Roof Hydrocarbon Tanks 

TANK DIAMTER  
m 

1. Up to 24 m 

2. Over 24 m—36 m 

3. Over 36 m—42 m 

4. Over 42 m—48 m 

4. Over 48 m—54 m 

4. Over 54 m—60 m 

4. Over 60 m 

 

CLASS II LIQUID 

4.1 lpm (0.10 gpm) 
1 Outlet 
30 minutes  

4.1 lpm (0.10 gpm) 
1 Outlet 
30 minutes  

4.1 lpm (0.10 gpm) 
2 Outlet 
30 minutes  

4.1 lpm (0.10 gpm) 
2 Outlet 
30 minutes  

4.1 lpm (0.10 gpm) 
2 Outlet 
30 minutes  

4.1 lpm (0.10 gpm) 
3 Outlet 
30 minutes  

CLASS I AND LIQUID 
HEATED ABOVE THEIR 
FLASH POINTS 

CRUDE OIL AND LIQUID 
WITH BOILOVER 

4.1 lpm (0.10 gpm) 
1 Outlet 
55 minutes  

4.1 lpm (0.10 gpm) 
2 Outlet 
55 minutes  

4.1 lpm (0.10 gpm) 
3 Outlet 
55 minutes  

4.1 lpm (0.10 gpm) 
4 Outlet 
55 minutes  

4.1 lpm (0.10 gpm) 
5 Outlet 
55 minutes  

4.1 lpm (0.10 gpm) 
6 Outlet 
55 minutes  

4.1 lpm (0.10 gpm) 
1 Outlet 
55 minutes  

4.1 lpm (0.10 gpm) 
2 Outlet 
55 minutes  

4.1 lpm (0.10 gpm) 
3 Outlet 
55 minutes  

4.1 lpm (0.10 gpm) 
4 Outlet 
55 minutes  

4.1 lpm (0.10 gpm) 
5 Outlet 
55 minutes  

4.1 lpm (0.10 gpm) 
6 Outlet 
55 minutes  

4.1 lpm (0.10 gpm) 
3 Outlet, and additional 1 
outlet for every 465 m2 
30 minutes  

4.1 lpm (0.10 gpm) 
6 Outlet, and additional 1 
outlet for every 700 m2 
55 minutes  

4.1 lpm (0.10 gpm) 
6 Outlet, and additional 1 
outlet for every 465 m2 
55 minutes  

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 664 of 1348 

Table 9.11: Foam Sprinkler/ Deluge/ Pourer System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

15.  DESIGN                     

xxii.   The design Criteria of Foam Monitor System for Loading Racks (Truck or Rail 

CRITERIA FOR 
LOW –
EXPANSION 
FOAM   SYSTEM 

 

cars at loading and unloading) shall comply with Table 9.11.G. 

xxiii.   The design Criteria of Foam Monitor System for Loading Diked and non-

diked areas shall comply with Table 9.11.H. 

xxiv.   Fixed foam outlets shall not be used to protect horizontal or pressure tanks.  

Table 9.11.G.: Design Criteria for Foam Monitors System for Loading Racks 

HAZARD 

FOAM TYPE 

1. HYDROCARBONS  

2. HYDROCARBONS  

3. FLAMMABLE AND COM-

BUSTIBLE LIQUIDS      
REQUIRING ALCOHOL 
RESISTANT FOAMS 

Protein and    
Flouroprotein 

AFFF, FFFP,  
Alcohol Resistant 
AFFF and FFFP 

Alcohol Resistant 
Foams 

REQUIRED DESIGN  
DENSITY          
(MINIMUM             
APPLICATION RATE) 

FOAM      
ADDITION 
FOR         
HYDRAULIC 
IMBALANCE 

DURATION 

6.5 lpm (0.16 gpm) 

10% 

15 minutes  

4.1 lpm (0.10 gpm) 

10% 

15 minutes  

4.1 lpm (0.10 gpm) 
or Manufacturer’s 
specifications, 
whichever is higher 

10% 

15 minutes  

Table 9.11.H.: Design Criteria for Foam Monitors System for Diked Areas 

HAZARD 

REQUIRED DESIGN  DENSITY          
(MINIMUM  APPLICATION 
RATE) 

DURATION 
CLASS I 
HYDROCARBON 

DURATION 
CLASS II 
HYDROCARBONS 

1. LOW LEVEL FOAM           

DISCHARGE OUTLET 

4.1 lpm (0.10 gpm) 

2. FOAM MONITORS 

6.5 lpm (0.16 gpm) 

10% 

10% 

15 minutes  

15 minutes  

Points to Ponder 

The application of solid foam streams, turbulently into the flammable liquid could 

cause ignition of the ensuing fire, due to the static discharges resulting from 

splashes and turbulence. 

Any application of foam to an unignited flammable liquid should be as gentle as 

possible through an appropriately selected, designed and executed method of 

foam systems. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 665 of 1348 

 

Figure 9.35: Typical Fixed Foam Discharge and Water spray cooling System  outlet System for Hydrocarbon tanks 

Figure 9.36: Typical Fixed Foam Monitor System for Diked Area 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 666 of 1348 

 

Table 9.11: Foam Sprinkler/ Deluge/ Pourer System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

14. MEDIUM 

AND HIGH –
EXPANSION 
FOAM      
SYSTEM 

i.  Medium- and high-expansion foams shall be specifically evaluated to verify the 
applicability of medium- or high-expansion foam as a fire control agent for the 
type of hazard being considered for the application of foam. 

ii.  Medium and high-expansion Foam Systems shall be provided where required by 

other sections of the code to protect hazards such as Ordinary combustibles, 
Flammable Liquids etc. 

iii.  Liquefied Natural Gas (LPG) shall be protected only with High Expansion Foam 

Systems. 

iv.  Medium and high-expansion Foam Systems shall  not be used on fires containing 
Cellulose Nitrate, energized unenclosed electrical equipment and Water reactive 
metals such as Sodium, Potassium, Sodium-Potassium Alloys (NaK), Triethyl-
aluminium, Phosphorus pentoxide, Liquefied Flammable Gas.  

v.  Protection with Foam and Personnel Safety shall be as per material MSDS and 

foam manufacturers specifications. 

vi.  Medium and high-expansion Foam Systems can be used in total flooding systems, 

Local application systems or portable foam generating Systems. 

vii. Medium and high-expansion Foam Systems shall maintain an electrical clearance 

from live insulated electrical equipment as per Table 9.11.I. 

viii. Automatic Detection in accordance with Chapter 8. Fire Detection and Alarm 

Systems shall be used for fixed High expansion Foam Systems. 

ix.  Where hazard evaluation demands, detectors shall be Civil Defence listed and 

approved. The same applies to flame, combustibles, vapor, gas detectors, inter-
faced to control systems as per  Chapter 8. Fire Detection and Alarm Systems. 

x.  The foam-generating apparatus shall be located and arranged so that inspection, 

testing, recharging, and other maintenance operations are facilitated and the 
interruption of protection is held to a minimum. 

xi.  The foam-generating equipment shall be located as close as possible to the haz-
ard(s) it protects, but not where it will be unduly exposed to a fire or explosion. 

xii. The system Design, Application and installation shall be as per manufacturer’s 

specifications. 

Table 9.11.I.: Clearance from High Expansion Foam Equipment to Live Uninsulated Electrical Component 

NOMINAL LINE 
VOLTAGE 
kV 

1. Up to 15 

2. 23  

3. 34.5  

4. 46  

5. 69 

6. 115 

7.138 

8. 161 

9. 196– 230 

10. 287-380 

11. 500 

12. 500-700 

 

NOMINAL VOLTAGE TO 
GROUND 
kV 

DESIGN BASIC IMPULSE 
LEVEL (BIL) 
kV 

MNIMUM CLEARANCE OF 
HIGH EXPANSION  
FOAM EQUIPMENT 

Up to 9 

13 

20 

27 

40 

66 

80 

93 

114-132 

166-220 

290 

290-400 

110 

150 

200 

250 

350 

550 

650 

750 

178 mm 

254 mm 

330 mm 

432 mm 

635 mm 

940 mm 

1118 mm 

1321 mm 

900/ 1050/ 1175/ 1300  1600 mm/ 1930 mm/ 
2210 mm/ 2489 mm 

1425/ 1550 

1675/ 1800/ 1925 

2100/ 2300 

2769 mm/ 3048 mm 

1675 mm/ 3327 mm/ 
3607 mm/ 3886 mm 

4267 mm/ 4674 mm 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 667 of 1348 

Table 9.11: Foam Sprinkler/ Deluge/ Pourer System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

14. MEDIUM AND 

HIGH –
EXPANSION 
FOAM SYSTEM 

xiii. The maximum submergence time for high-expansion Foam Systems meas-

ured from the start of the foam discharge shall not be more than the duration 
mentioned as per Table 9.11.J. 

Table 9.11.J.: Maximum Submergence Time for High Expansion Foam 

LIGHT OR         
UNPROTECTED 
STEEL            
CONSTRUCTION- 
SPRINKLERRED 

LIGHT OR         
UNPROTECTED 
STEEL             
CONSTRUCTION- 
NON-
SPRINKLERRED 

HEAVY OR   
PROTECTED 
FIRE RESISTIVE   
CONSTRUCTION- 
SPRINKLERRED 

HEAVY OR    
PROTECTED 
FIRE RESISTIVE   
CONSTRUCTION- 
NON- 
SPRINKLERRED 

3 minutes  

2 minutes  

5 minutes  

3 minutes  

4 minutes  

3 minutes  

5 minutes  

3 minutes  

4 minutes  

3 minutes  

6 minutes  

4 minutes  

7 minutes  

5 minutes  

8 minutes  

6 minutes  

5 minutes  

4 minutes  

6 minutes  

5 minutes  

7 minutes  

5 minutes  

8 minutes  

6 minutes  

7 minutes  

5 minutes  

8 minutes  

6 minutes  

 

HAZARD 

1. FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS 

*FLASH POINTS BELOW 
38°C (100°F)+ HAVING A 
VAPOR PRESSURE NOT 
EXCEEDING 276 KPA (40 
PSIA) 

2. COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS 
*FLASH POINTS OF 38°C 
(100°F) AND ABOVE+ 

3. LOW-DENSITY           
COMBUSTIBLES (I.E. 
FOAM RUBBER, FOAM 
PLASTICS, ROLLED       
TISSUE, OR CREPE       
PAPER) 

4. HIGH-DENSITY            
COMBUSTIBLES (I.E. 
ROLLED PAPER KRAFT 
OR COATED BANDED) 

5. HIGH-DENSITY COM-

BUSTIBLES (I.E. ROLLED 
PAPER KRAFT OR COAT-
ED UNBANDED) 

6. RUBBER TIRES 

7. COMBUSTIBLES IN      
CARTONS, BAGS, OR 
FIBER DRUMS 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 668 of 1348 

3.10.  Water Mist Systems 

 
3.10.1. 

 The requirements for Water Mist System material, design, installation shall be as 
per Table 9.12., and the Applicable General Requirements of Table 9.3.   

Table 9.12: Water Mist System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. DEFINITION 

2. APPLICATION 

3. COMPONENTS 

4. FIRE PUMPS 

i.  A distribution system connected to a water supply or water and atomizing media 

supplies that is equipped with one or more nozzles capable of delivering water 
mist intended to control, suppress, or extinguish fires  

ii.  Water mist shall be as per the manufacturer's specifications with requirements of 
its listing based on its demonstration to meet the performance requirements for 
specific applications such as Road Tunnels, Service Tunnels, Cable spread areas, 
Machinery rooms, Marine service rooms, Combustion turbines, wet benches and 
such processing equipment, Local application to equipment, Industrial oil cook-
ers, computer room raised floors, Chemical fume hoods and continuous wood 
board presses. 

iii. A Water Mist System without detailed design, equipment selection, installation 
and maintenance manual, listed and recognized by international testing and cer-
tification bodies shall not be acceptable. 

iv. Water mist can be discharged through various arrangement of Systems such as 

Water Mist deluge Systems, Pre-action Systems, Dry Pipe Systems etc. See                 
Section  1.10. for definitions. 

i.  The characteristics of the specific application (compartment variables and hazard 

classification) shall be consistent with the listing of the system. 

ii.  Pre-engineered water mist systems for compartment enclosures shall not be ex-

trapolated beyond the volume, ceiling height, ventilation rate, and number of 
nozzles tested, unless the dimensions of the enclosure are such that additional 
nozzles are required to maintain nozzle spacing. 

iii. The system design and installation manual evaluated by the listing tests shall 

identify the working limits and parameters of the system, the fire hazards, and 
the range of compartment variables for which the listing is applicable. 

iv. The parameters of ventilation, either natural or forced shall be addressed in the 

design and installation manual. 

i.  Fire Pumps, Control System, Additives, Fire Water Tank, Gas and water contain-

ers/cylinders, Pipes, Tubes, Fittings, Spray Nozzles, pressure gauges, Isolation 
valves, Solenoid Valves, Strainers/Filters, Fire Detection and Alarm Systems and 
Signs. 

ii.  All the components of the water mist  systems shall be listed and approved by 

Civil Defence. 

iii. The system components shall be rated for the maximum working pressure to 

which they are exposed, but not less than 12.1 bar (175 psi). 

i.  Fire Pump set shall consist of 1 Electric driven pump, 1 diesel driven pump and 1 

electric Jockey pump, complete with controllers. 

ii.  Electrical or diesel-driven pumps supplying water mist systems shall be of suffi-

cient capacity to exceed both the system flow rate and pressure demands as de-
termined by hydraulic calculations, by a minimum of 10 percent for both flow 
and pressure. 

iii. The discharge piping for water mist pumps and pump assemblies for high pres-

sure or intermediate pressure water mist systems shall be equipped with a 
valved test connection for the purpose of connecting a flow metering device to 
permit accurate measurement of the pump performance during the acceptance 
test and during annual testing. 

5. WET RISERS 
AND HOSE 
SYSTEMS 

 

i.  Where wet risers and hose systems are required by this code, a separate systems 

complete with Pumps, pipes and fittings shall be provided as per other sections 
of this chapter. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 669 of 1348 

 

Table 9.12: Water Mist System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

6. BREECHING 

INLET 

i.  A breeching inlet for Civil Defence shall be provided for all water mist systems 

except where                                                                                                                                                 
a. The water mist is protecting an area less than 200 m2 .                                                      
b. The water mist system pressure exceeds 12 bar and is supplied by storage cylin-
ders.                                                                                                                                                         
c. Water mist systems where the atomizing medium is essential for fire suppres-
sion. 

ii.  For water mist systems with system design pressures less than or equal to 12 bar 
(175 psi), the connection of the fire department connection to the system shall be 
made on the upstream (supply) side of the system strainer or filter. 

iii. For water mist systems with system design pressures in excess of 12 bar (175 psi), 
the connection of the fire department connection to the system shall be made on 
the suction side of the pressure source components. 

i.  All the components in the water mist systems and the additive injection system 

shall be of corrosion resistant material. 

i.  Gas and water containers subject to pressurization shall be made, tested, ap-

proved, equipped and marked in accordance with the current specifications of the 
ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code, Section VIII,  or other approved interna-
tional standards. 

ii.  Each pressurized container shall be provided with a safety device to release ex-

cess pressure. 

iii. Each water and gas container shall have a permanent nameplate or other perma-
nent marking specifying the liquid/gas held in the container (including additives) 
and the nominal water volume and pressurization level (where applicable) of the 
container. 

iv. All containers supplying the same manifold outlet shall be interchangeable and of 

the same size and charge. 

i.  Fire Detection, control system, design and installation shall be as per Chapter 8. 

Fire Detection and Alarm Systems. 

i.  Nozzles shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s listing. 
ii.  The minimum and maximum height and nozzle pressure limitations shall be in 

accordance with the manufacturer’s listing. 

iii. The minimum and maximum distances between nozzles, distance from walls, ob-
structions to nozzles, distance below ceilings etc. shall be in accordance with the 
manufacturer’s listing. 

iv. Temperature rating, Classifications and color coding of thermally activated noz-

zles shall be as per Table 9.12.A. 

Table 9.12.A: Nozzle Operating Temperature and Colour Classification 

TEMPERATURE 
RATING OF    
SPRINKLER HEAD 
57OC—77OC  
79OC—107OC  
121OC—149OC  
163OC—191OC  
204OC—246OC  
260OC—302OC  
343OC  

TEMPERATURE            
CLASSIFICATION 

COLOUR CODE 

GLASS BULB  
COLOURS 

Ordinary 

Uncoloured or Black  Orange or Red 

Intermediate 

White 

Yellow or Green 

High 

Extra High 

Blue 

Red 

Very Extra High 

Green 

Ultra High 

Ultra High 

Orange 

Orange 

Blue 

Purple 

Black 

Black 

Black 

7. ADDITIVES 

8. GAS AND  
WATER   
CONTAINERS  

9.  FIRE           

DETECTION 
AND ALARM 
SYSTEM 

10. NOZZLES 

MAXIMUM  CEILING           
TEMPERATURE 

1. 38OC  
2. 66OC  
3. 107OC  
4. 149OC  
5. 191OC  
6. 246OC  
7. 329OC  
 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 670 of 1348 

 

Table 9.12: Water Mist System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

11. SYSTEM          
PROTECTION 
AREA                
LIMITATIONS 

12. PRESSURE 

GAUGES 

13. STRAINERS AND 

FILTERS 

14. VALVES 

15. PRV’S 

i.  The maximum area on any floor to be protected by water mist supplied by 

any one water mist system riser or a combined system riser shall be 4831 m2 
for Light Hazard and Ordinary Hazard. 

i.  Pressure gauges shall be installed in the following locations.                                              

a. On both sides of a pressure regulating valve                                                                 
b. On the pressurized side of all supply connections                                                        
c. On the pressurized side of all system control valves                                                    
d. On all pressurized storage containers                                                                             
e. On all air supplies for dry pipe and pre-action systems 

i.  All installed water mist systems must have a suitable and approved water bas-

ket inline water filter and a suitably approved Y-strainer to capture any dirt 
from entering the pumps and causing nozzle blockages. 

ii.  Every water mist nozzle shall have a suitable inbuilt stainless steel sieve to 

prevent dirt from entering the nozzle and causing blockages. 

i.  All valves in the system shall be listed and installed as per their listing. 
ii.  Valves on connections to water supplies, sectional control and isolation 

valves, and other valves in supply pipes to nozzles. 

iii. Water mist system Control and activation valves shall operate by an approved 

mechanical, electrical, or pneumatic means. 

i.  Compressed gas pressure reducing valves shall be installed as per their listing, 

where the supply pressure is higher than the system design pressure.  

ii.  Pressure set, point-adjusting mechanisms on the PRVs shall be tamper re-

sistant, and the adjustment shall be indicated by a permanent marking. 

16. DRAIN AND TEST        

i.  Each water mist system shall have a drain on the system side of the control 

CONNECTIONS 

valve. 

ii.  The inspector’s test connections shall contain an orifice equal to or smaller 

than the smallest nozzle installed in the system. 

17. HANGERS AND       

i.  Hangers and supports shall be located in accordance with the requirements 

SUPPORTS 

contained within the system’s design manual. 

ii.  The length of an unsupported arm over to a nozzle shall not exceed 0.6 m (2 

ft.) for steel pipe or 0.3 m (1 ft.) for steel tubing. 

iii. Hangers used on low pressure water mist systems shall be permitted to be 

designed and installed in accordance with Table 9.7.30. 

iv. The tube Hanger Maximum spacing shall be as per Table 9.12.B. 

Table 9.12.B: Water Mist Tube Hanger Spacing 

TUBE O.D (Outer Diameter) 

MAXIMUM SPACING BETWEEN HANGERS 

1. 6– 14 mm 

2. 15– 22 mm 

3. 23-28 mm 

4. 30-38 mm 

5. 40-49 mm 

6. 50– 59 mm 

7. 60– 70 mm 

8. 71-89 mm 

9. 90-108 mm 

 

1.21 m 

1.52 m 

1.82 m 

2.12 m 

2.42 m 

3 m 

3.33 m 

3.64 m 

3.94 m 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 671 of 1348 

 

Figure 9.37.: Typical Water Mist System 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 672 of 1348 

3.11.  Yard Hydrant Systems 

 
3.11.1. 

 

 The requirements for Yard Hydrant System material, design, installation shall be as 
per Table 9.13. and Applicable general requirements of Table 9.3. 

Table 9.13.: Yard Hydrant System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

i.  A fire hydrant system is a water supply with a sufficient pressure and flow de-
livered through pipes around the protected premises, at open yards or along 
the fire access road in public spaces to a strategically located network of hy-
drant valves for fire-fighting purposes or to refill the Civil Defence water tank-
ers. 

ii.  Consideration should be given to establish Public Fire Hydrant System as part 

of UAE infrastructure.  

iii. Private Fire Hydrant Systems are the Hydrant network System provided on pri-

vate property specifically to protect the buildings and structures within that 
particular property.  

i.  Where a private Fire Hydrant network is required by the Civil Defence, the Fire 

Hydrant network system shall be ‘dedicated’. Combined networks with irriga-
tion, processes or domestic use are not allowed. 

ii.  All new developments greater than 20,000 m2 shall be provided with private 

yard hydrant system. 

iii. All storage, warehouse and factories, having a built area and/or storage yard  

exceeding 3600 m2 shall be provided with a private yard hydrant system. 

i.  Fire Pumps, Control System, Fire Water Tank, Pipes, Fittings, Hydrant pillar 

with instantaneous coupling valve outlets, pressure gauges, Isolation valves, 
Hose, Signs. 

ii.  All components of the yard hydrant system shall be listed and approved by Civ-

il Defence. 

iii. System components shall be rated for the maximum working pressure to which 

they are exposed, but not less than 12.1 bar (175 psi). 

i.  Hydrants shall not be less than 6 inch. (152 mm) in diameter. 
ii.  Hydrants shall be of wet type and above ground. 
iii. Hydrant outlet shall be of instantaneous coupling for hose connection. 

i.  The minimum flow rate for each fire hydrant shall be 500 Gallons per Minute 

at 250 gpm per outlet (1900 LPM at 950 LPM/outlet). 

ii.  Two number of fire hydrants shall be considered for hydraulic demand calcula-

tions which is, a total flow requirement of 1000GPM (3800 LPM) per single 
yard hydrant system. 

iii. The minimum Pressure required for the most remote fire hydrant in the sys-

tem loop is 6.9 bars.  

i.  Pipes and Fittings for the fire Hydrant system shall be approved by Civil De-

fence. See Section 9.20. 

ii.  Steel piping shall not be used for general underground service.  
iii. The type and class of pipe for a particular underground installation shall be 
determined through consideration of factors such as Corrosion, working 
pressure and temperature, soil conditions, susceptibility of pipe to ex-
ternal loads of earth and traffic. 

iv. The underground Hydrant piping shall be HDPE (High Density Polyeth-

ylene),   with a minimum of standard dimension ratio (SDR) 9. 

1. DEFINITION 

2. APPLICATION 

3. COMPONENTS 

4. HYDRANTS 

5. FLOW AND  
PRESSURE 

6. PIPING 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 673 of 1348 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

Table 9.13.: Yard Hydrant System Requirements 

7. WATER 

i.  The water for the Hydrant System shall be potable. 
ii.  TSE (Treated Sewage Affluent) water, tested for fire fighting purposes shall be ac-

8. INSTALLA-
TION 

ceptable. 

iii. Lake and Pond (Sweet) water shall be acceptable, provided that an adequate water 

level reserve is ensured at all times. 

i.  Hydrants shall be installed along the fire access road around the premises 

to be protected. 

ii.  The hydrant piping shall be looped without open ends, such that any isola-
tion from one side will not hamper the water supply from the other end to 
any hydrant. 

iii.  The maximum allowed hydrant piping wing without looping is 45 m. 
iv.  The piping shall not be installed beneath buildings. 
v.  A pipe under driveways shall be buried at a minimum depth of 0.9 m. 
vi.  A pipe under railroad tracks shall be buried at a minimum depth of 1.2 m.  
vii.  Hydrants shall be set on flat stones or concrete slabs and shall be provided 

with small stones (or the equivalent) placed around the drain to ensure 
drainage.  

viii.  The center of a hose outlet shall be not less than 457 mm and not more 

than 914mm above final grade.  

ix.  Hydrants shall be protected with barricades if subject to mechanical dam-

age, Vehicular accidents. Such means of hydrant protection shall be ar-
ranged in a manner that does not interfere with the connection to, or op-
eration of, hydrants. 

x.  Check Valves, Detector Check Valves and Backflow Prevention Valves shall 
not be installed in the service stub between the fire hydrant and the water 
supply piping. 

xi.  All hydrants shall be with an isolation valve connection in a valve chamber. 

9. LOCATION 

i.  Fire hydrants shall be located at not less than 2 m and not more than 12 m 

from the building to be protected. 

ii.  The spacing between Hydrants along the fire access road shall be as follows.                                                                                                                                             

a. Occupancies other than storage and industrial shall be 120 m.                    
b. Light and Ordinary hazard Storage/Industrial occupancies shall be 100 m. 
c. High Hazard storage and industrial occupancies shall be 60 m.                     
d. Logistics warehouse and Waste dumping lands shall be 60 m. 

AND               
SPACING 

 

Figure 9.38.: Hydrant Isolation Valve Chamber and Typical Hydrant Installation 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 674 of 1348 

3.12.  Wet Chemical Systems 

 
3.12.1. 

 The requirements for Wet Chemical System material, design, installation shall be 
as per Table 9.14. 

Table 9.14: Wet Chemical System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. DEFINITION 

2. APPLICATION 

3. COMPO-
NENTS 

4. NOZZLE  

i.  Generally a wet chemical solution is, including but not limited to, potassium car-

bonate–based, potassium acetate–based, potassium citrate–based, or a combina-
tion thereof, and is mixed with water to form an alkaline solution capable of being 
discharged through piping or tubing when under expellant gas pressure. 

ii.  The wet Chemical System in this code refers to pre-engineered systems, that dis-
charge wet chemical from fixed nozzles and piping by means of an expellant gas. 
iii. Wet chemical extinguishing agents shall not be acceptable for use in areas where 

fires involve an energized electrical equipment. 

iv.  The building owner(s) shall be responsible for the protection of a common ex-

haust duct(s) used by more than one tenant and the tenant shall be responsible 
for the protection of common exhaust duct(s) serving hoods located within the 
tenant’s space and up to the point of connection to the building owner’s common 
exhaust duct. 

i.  The pre-engineered Wet Chemical System can be used to protect hazards such as 

Commercial Kitchen Hoods, Plenums, Ducts and associated cooking appliances, 
Grease removal devices and emergency recovery devices installed in exhaust sys-
tem. 

ii.  Each protected cooking appliance, individual hood, and branch exhaust duct di-

rectly connected to the hood shall be protected by a system or systems designed 
for simultaneous operation. 

i.  Wet Chemical container, Detectors, Control System, Expellant Gas cartridge, 

Pipes, Tubes, Fittings, Hose, Discharge Nozzles, pressure gauges, Manual actua-
tors, Isolation valves, and Solenoid Valves.  

ii.  The wet Chemical system as an entire system with its design, installation and 

maintenance manual from the manufacturer shall be listed and approved by Civil 
Defence. 

i.  Nozzle shall be listed and shall be provided with an internal strainer or a separate 

listed strainer located immediately upstream. 

ii.  Discharge nozzles shall be of brass, stainless steel, or other corrosion-resistant 

materials, or be protected inside and out against corrosion. 

iii. All discharge nozzles shall be provided with caps or other suitable devices to pre-
vent the entrance of grease vapors, moisture, or other foreign materials into the 
piping and shall blow off or open during discharge. 

5. DETECTORS /
OPERATING 
DEVICES 

i.  Operating devices shall be designed to function properly through a minimum tem-

perature range from 0°C to 49°C or marked to indicate their temperature limita-
tions. 

ii.  Detectors or Operating devices and control system shall be part of the listed sys-

tem as assembly. 

iii. The detection of Wet Chemical System shall be interfaced with the main fire de-

tection and alarm system. 

iv.  At least one fusible link or heat detector shall be installed within each exhaust 

duct opening and cooking appliance in accordance with the manufacturer’s listing. 

6. FUEL/POWER    

SHUT-OFF 

i.  On activation of any cooking equipment of the fire-extinguishing system, all 

sources of fuel and electric power that produce heat to all equipment protected 
by the system shall be shut down. 

ii.  Gas appliances not requiring protection but located under the same ventilation 

equipment shall also be shut off. 

iii. Shutoff devices shall require manual resetting prior to fuel or power being re-

 

stored. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 675 of 1348 

Table 9.14: Wet Chemical System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

7. SYSTEM   

ACTUATION 

i.  Wet Chemical Systems shall have both automatic and manual methods of actua-

tion. 

ii.  A readily accessible means for the manual activation shall be located in a path of 

egress. When manual activation is used for cooking related protection, the manual 
activation device shall be installed no more than 1200 mm, nor less than 1067 mm 
above the floor and shall clearly identify the hazard protected. 

8. EXPELLANT 

GAS 

i.  A method and instructions shall be provided for checking the amount or the pres-
sure of expellant gas to ensure that it is sufficient for the proper operation of the 
system. 

9. LOCATION 

i.  Dry chemical containers and expellant gas assemblies shall be located within the 
temperature range specified in the manufacturer’s listed installation and mainte-
nance manual. 

10. DESIGN 

i.  Wet Chemical Systems can be Total flooding, Local application type, Hand hose type 
or combinations. Any Wet Chemical System shall be Engineered or Pre-engineered.  

ii.  All the system, cylinders, containers, Wet Chemical, expellant gas, piping, valves 

and nozzles shall be as per Manufacturer’s instructions with approval and listing for 
particular applications and same shall be listed with Civil Defence. 

iii. To expel the agent, most systems use pressurized cartridges of nitrogen or carbon 

dioxide.  

iv. In kitchen hood and common exhaust duct protection, each protected cooking ap-
pliance(s), individual hood(s), and branch exhaust duct(s) directly connected to the 
hood or common exhaust duct shall be protected by a single system or by systems 
designed for simultaneous operation.  

v.  Maximum Discharge time shall not exceed 30 seconds. 

 

Figure 9.39: Typical Wet Chemical System protection for Kitchen Hood 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 676 of 1348 

3.13.  Dry Chemical Systems 

 
3.13.1. 

 

 

 The requirements for Dry Chemical System material, design, installation shall be as 
per Table 9.15. 

Table 9.15: Dry Chemical System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. DEFINITION 

2. APPLICATION 

3. COMPONENTS 

4. ELECTRICAL 
CLEARANCE 

5. NOZZLE  

 

i.  A Dry Chemical extinguishing agent is a finely divided powdered material that 
has been specially treated to be water repellent and capable of being fluidized 
and free-flowing so that it can be discharged through hose lines and piping when 
under expellant gas pressure. 

ii.  The dry Chemical System in this code refers to pre-engineered systems, that dis-

charge the dry chemical from either hand hose line or fixed nozzles and piping 
by means of an expellant gas. 

iii. The sodium bicarbonate-based dry chemical agent consists primarily of sodium 

bicarbonate (NaHCO3) and is suitable for use on all types of flammable liquid 
and gas fires (Class B) and for fires involving energized electrical equipment 
(Class C), Cooking oils and Fats. 

iv. Commercially available agents are essentially potassium bicarbonate (KHCO3), 
potassium chloride (KCl), and urea-based potassium bicarbonate (KC2N2H3O3). 

v.  The multipurpose Dry Chemical agent has as its base monoammonium phos-

phate (NH4H2PO4) and is similar in its effect on Class B and Class C fires to the 
other dry chemicals. The multipurpose Dry Chemical shall not be used on deep-
fat fryers and delicate electrical equipment. 

vi. Different types of Dry Chemicals from different manufacturer’s shall not be 

mixed for protection purpose. 

i.  A pre-engineered Dry Chemical System can be used to protect hazards such as 

Flammable and Combustible Liquids/ Gases/ Solids/ Plastics, Oil filled transform-
ers, circuit breakers, commercial kitchen hoods.  

ii.  Dry Chemical extinguishing systems shall not be used for protection of Cellulose 
Nitrate and Combustible metals, such as sodium, potassium, magnesium, titani-
um and zirconium. 

iii. Multiple systems protecting common hazards shall be designed for a simultane-

ous operation. 

i.  Dry Chemical container, Detectors, Control System, Expellant Gas cartridge, 

Pipes, Tubes, Fittings, Hand Hose, Discharge Nozzles, pressure gauges, Manual 
actuators, Isolation valves, and Solenoid Valves.  

ii.  The dry chemical system as an entire system with its design, installation and 
maintenance manual from manufacturer shall be listed and approved by Civil 
Defence. 

i.  All the dry chemical System equipment and component shall be located to main-

tain the required electrical clearance as per the manufacturer’s specifications. 

ii.  Where the design basic insulation level (BIL) is not available and where nominal 
voltage is used for the design criteria, the highest minimum clearance specified 
for this group shall be used. 

i.  The nozzle shall be listed and shall be provided with an internal strainer or a sep-

arate listed strainer located immediately upstream of the nozzle. 

ii.  Discharge nozzles shall be of brass, stainless steel or other corrosion-resistant 

materials, or be protected inside and out against corrosion. 

iii. All discharge nozzles shall be provided with caps or other suitable devices to 

prevent the entrance of grease vapors, moisture or other foreign materials into 
the piping and shall blow off or open during discharge. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 677 of 1348 

 

Table 9.15: Dry Chemical System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

6.  DETECTORS /

OPERATING     
DEVICES 

i.  The operating devices shall be designed to function properly through a mini-

mum temperature range from 0°C to 49°C or marked to indicate their temper-
ature limitations. 

ii.  The detectors or Operating devices and control system shall be part of the 

listed system as assembly. 

iii.  The detection of Dry Chemical System shall be interfaced with The main fire 

detection and alarm system. 

7.  FUEL/POWER    

SHUT-OFF 

i.  Shutdown of Ventilation, fans, openings, doors and windows, shutdown of 

fuel, gas, electrical power to the protected equipment etc. shall be achieved at 
the time of system discharge for the successful extinguishing of fire. 

ii.  Shutoff devices shall require manual resetting prior to fuel or power being re-

stored. 

8.  SYSTEM          
ACTUATION 

i.  Dry Chemical Systems shall have both automatic and manual methods of actu-

ation except for hand hose line systems. 

ii.  At least one manual actuator shall be provided for each system. 
iii. A readily accessible means for manual activation shall be located in a path of 

egress. The manual activation device shall be installed no more than 1200 mm, 
nor less than 1067 mm, above the floor and shall clearly identify the hazard 
protected. 

9.  TOTAL         

FLOODING       
SYSTEMS 

i.  A total flooding type of system shall be used only where there is a permanent 

enclosure surrounding the hazard that adequately enables the required con-
centration to be built up.  

ii.  The total area of unclosable openings shall not exceed 15 percent of the total 

area of the sides, top and bottom of the enclosure. 

iii.  Where unclosable openings exceed 15 percent of the total enclosure surface 

area, a local application system shall be used to protect the entire hazard. 

iv.  Where possible, openings such as doorways, windows, and so on, shall be ar-
ranged to close before, or simultaneously with, the start of the dry chemical 
discharge. 

v.  In engineered systems, the minimum design rate of application shall be based 

on the quantity of dry chemical and the maximum time to obtain the design 
concentration, as described in the manufacturer’s listed design and installa-
tion manual. 

vi.  In engineered systems, the rate of application shall be such that the design 

concentration in all parts of the enclosure shall be obtained within 30 seconds.        

i.  Local application systems shall be used for the extinguishment of fires in flam-

mable or combustible liquids, gases, and shallow solids (e.g., paint deposits) 
where the hazard is not enclosed or where the enclosure does not conform to 
the requirements for total flooding. 

ii.  For flammable liquid fires, the nozzles shall be placed tankside or overhead, or 

a combination of tankside and overhead within the limits of the listing, and 
located to prevent splashing during discharge. 

iii.  The minimum effective discharge time and required minimum quantity of dry 
chemical and the minimum application rate shall be as per the manufacturer’s 
specifications. 

10.  LOCAL             

APPLICATION 
SYSTEMS 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 678 of 1348 

 

Table 9.15: Dry Chemical System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

11.  HAND HOSE 

LINE         
SYSTEMS 

i.  Hand hose systems shall not be used as a substitute for dry chemical extinguishing 

systems equipped with fixed nozzles except where the hazard cannot be ade-
quately or economically provided with a fixed nozzle protection. 

ii.  If a single dry chemical supply is used for both a hand hose line system and a fixed 

nozzle system, the hazards protected by the two systems shall be separated so 
that the hand hose lines cannot be simultaneously used on the hazard protected 
by the fixed nozzle system. 

iii.  Hand hose line stations shall be placed so that they are easily accessible and shall 

have hose lines long enough to reach the most distant hazard that they are ex-
pected to protect. 

iv.  Manual actuation of the dry chemical system shall be possible at each hose line 

station. 

v.  A hand hose line shall have a sufficient quantity of dry chemical to permit its effec-

tive use for a minimum of 30 seconds.  

vi.  Where simultaneous use of two or more hose lines is possible, a sufficient quantity 

of dry chemical shall be available to supply the maximum number of nozzles that 
are likely to be used at any time for at least 30 seconds and at the appropriate 
flow rates. 

 

Figure 9.40. Typical Dry Chemical System protection  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 679 of 1348 

3.14.  Clean Agent Systems 

 
3.14.1. 

 The requirements for Clean Agent System material, design, installation shall be as 
per Table 9.16. 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

Table 9.16.: Clean Agent Systems Requirements 

1. DEFINITION 

i.  The Clean agents allowed in this code shall be electrically non-conducting and leave 

no residue upon evaporation. 

ii.  Any agent mentioned in this section is subject to the periodic evaluation by Civil 

Defence and United States Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) SNAP 
(Significant New Alternatives Policy). Such evaluations shall be based on the clean 
agents’ adverse effects on Human, Marine, Animal health and environmental ad-
verse effects. 

iii. Halocarbon Agents are                                                                                                           

a. Hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs)                                                                                                   
b. Hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs)                                                                                     
c. Perfluorocarbons (PFCs or FCs)                                                                                             
d. Fluoroiodocarbons (FICs)                                                                                                      
e. Fluoroketones (FKs). 

iv. Inert Gas Agents are                                                                                                                    

a. IG-01                                                                                                                                               
b. IG-100                                                                                                                                         
c. IG-55                                                                                                                                              
d. IG-541  

v.  Unnecessary exposure to Halocarbon clean agents OR Inert gas agents including at 

and below the NOAEL and halocarbon decomposition products shall be avoided. 

2. SAFETY 

i. 

In not normally occupied areas, where egress takes longer than 30 seconds but less 
than 1 minute, the halocarbon agent shall not be used in a concentration exceeding 
its LOAEL. See Table 9.16.A. for Halocarbon NOAEL and LOAEL. 

ii.  Unnecessary exposure to inert gas agent systems resulting in low oxygen atmos-

pheres shall be avoided. The maximum exposure time in any case shall not exceed 5 
minutes. See Table 9.16.B. for Inert Gas NOAEL and LOAEL. 

AGENT 

1. FC-3-1-10 
2. FK-5-1-12 
3. HCFC Blend A 
4. HCFC-124 
5. HFC-125 
6. HFC-227ea 
7. HFC-23 
8. HFC-236fa 

Table 9.16.A: Halocarbon Agent NOAEL and LOAEL 

NOAEL (No Observed 
Adverse Effect Level) 

LOAEL (Low Observed 
Adverse Effect Level) 

EXTINGUISHING   
CONCENTRATIONS 

40 % 
10 % 
10 % 
1 % 
7.5 % 
9 % 
30 % 
10 % 

> 40 % 
> 10 % 
> 10 % 
2.5 % 
10 % 
> 10.5 % 
> 50 % 
15 % 

5.5 % 
4.5 % 
9.9 % 
6.6 % 
8.7 % 
6.6 % 
12.9 % 
6.3 % 

INERT GAS CONCENTRATION LEVELS  EXPOSURE LIMIT 

Table 9.16.B: Inert Gas Safety Levels 

EXTINGUISHING    
CONCENTRATIONS 

1. < 43 % (12% Oxygen) 
2. 43 % -52 % (12 % -10 % Oxygen) 
3. 52 % -62 % (10 % -8 % Oxygen) 
4. > 62 % (Below 8% Oxygen) 

5 minutes  
3 minutes  
Only used in normally unoccupied spaces 
Only used in normally unoccupied spaces 

IG– 01 (42%) 
IG-100 (31%) 
IG 541 (31%) 
IG-55 (35%) 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 680 of 1348 

 

Table 9.16.: Clean Agent Systems Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

3.  ELECTRICAL 
CLEARANCE 

i.  All Clean Agent System equipment and component shall be located to maintain 

the required electrical clearance as per the manufacturer’s specifications. 

ii.  Where the design basic insulation level (BIL) is not available and where nominal 
voltage is used for the design criteria, the highest minimum clearance specified 
for this group shall be used. 

4. LISTING 

i.  All Clean Agent systems, Clean Agent, Equipment, Design, Calculations, Installa-

tion and Maintenance manual shall be listed by Civil Defence. 

5. COMPONENTS 

i.  Clean Agent container, Detectors, Control System, Pipes, Tubes, Fittings, Valves, 
Discharge Nozzles, pressure gauges, Manual actuators, Time Delays and Signage. 

6. SYSTEM FLOW 
CALCULATIONS 

i.  System flow calculations shall be performed using a calculation method listed or 
approved by Civil Defence. The system design shall be within the manufacturer’s 
listed limitations. 

7.  ROOM         
INTEGRITY 
AND AIR 
TIGHTNESS 

ROOM VOLUME 
1. 1 m3 
2. 100 m3 
3. 1000 m3 
4. 10.000 m3 
5. 50,000 m3 
6. 500,000 m3 

 

i.  The room Integrity with airtight rooms shall be ensured for effective protection 

using clean agent systems. 

ii.  Room tightness, measured in n50 value, shall be carried out using a blower door 

measurement method. (The Blower door measurement is a scientific approach to 
identify and control air filtration.  It is primarily used to check for any possible 
leakages in a given area by applying two types of pressure: over pressure and 
under pressure. Calculation is based on the Air Change per Hour (ACH), meaning 
the number of time each hour, an amount of air equal to the volume of the area 
to be protected, leaks out at a pressure of 50Pa. The ventilator of the blower 
door measuring device creates a standard over/under pressure of 10 – 60 pa in 
the protected area.  The air escapes over the leakage surfaces of the walls, doors 
and windows to the outside during overpressure measurement or enters from 
there during under pressure measurement. The device measures the required 
flow volume so that the pressure difference of 50 Pa (as an example) needed for 
measuring can be maintained in the area.  After input of all the relevant values 
the program calculates the n50 value, which regulates itself and relates to the 
created pressure value of 50Pa). 

iii. The protected enclosure shall have the structural strength and integrity neces-

sary to contain the agent discharge. If the developed pressures present a threat 
to the structural strength of the enclosure, venting shall be provided to prevent 
excessive pressures. 

iv. The doors and windows used for the protected areas shall comply with fire regu-
lation and shall also be air tight to prevent leakage. The doors and windows shall 
have a mechanism for closing automatically in case of an emergency situation. 
For fire prevention systems the doors and windows shall be kept closed at all 
times except for access. 

v.  All penetrations in the enclosure shall be sealed to ensure airtightness. 
vi. The air tightness in terms of n50 values of the protected enclosure shall be as per 

Table 9.16.C. 

Table 9.16.C.: n50 values for Room Tightness 

n50 VALUE  

5.0 /hour 

1.5 /hour 

1.0 /hour 

0.1 /hour 

0.05 /hour 

0.01 /hour 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 681 of 1348 

 

Table 9.16.: Clean Agent Systems Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

i.  The flame extinguishing or inerting concentrations shall be used in deter-

mining the agent design concentration for a particular fuel.  

ii.  For combinations of fuels, the flame extinguishment or inerting value for the 
fuel requiring the greatest concentration shall be used unless tests are made 
on the actual mixture. 

iii.  Design concentrations shall comply with NFPA 2001 and manufacturer’s 

specifications. 

i.  The amount of halocarbon agent required to achieve the design concentra-

tion shall be calculated from the following formula. 

 
 
 
 
Where,  
 
W—Weight of Clean Agent, Kg 
V—Net Volume of the Hazard, m3 
S– Specific volume of superheated agent vapor, t(m3/Kg) 
C– Agent design concentration (Volume%) 
t– Minimum anticipated Temperature of protected volume, 0C 
 
ii.  The amount of halocarbon agent required to achieve the design concentra-

tion shall be calculated from the following formula. 

 
 
 
 
Where,  
 
X—Volume of Inert gas added per volume of protected space, Kg 
Vs—Specific Volume of Inert Gas agent at 210C and 1.013 bar  
S– Specific volume of Inert gas, t(m3/Kg) 
C– Inert Gas design concentration (Volume%) 
t– Minimum anticipated Temperature of protected volume, 0C 

i.  The minimum design rate of application shall be based on the quantity of 

agent required for the desired concentration and the time allotted to 
achieve the desired concentration. 

ii.  The discharge time period is defined as the time required to discharge from 

the nozzles 95 percent of the agent mass, at 70°F (21°C), necessary to 
achieve the minimum design concentration based on 20 percent safety fac-
tor for flame extinguishment. 

iii.  For Halocarbon agents, the discharge time required to achieve 95 percent of 
the minimum design concentration for flame extinguishment based on a 20 
percent safety factor shall not exceed 10 seconds. 

iv.  For Inert gas agents, the discharge time required to achieve 95 percent of 

the minimum design concentration for flame extinguishment based on a 20 
percent safety factor shall not exceed 60 seconds. 

8.  DESIGN              

CONCENTRATION 

9.  TOTAL             
FLOODING       
QUANTITY 

10. DISCHARGE TIME 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 682 of 1348 

 

Table 9.16.: Clean Agent Systems Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

11.  STORAGE 

CONTAINERS 

i.  The agent shall be stored in containers designed to hold that specific agent at 

ambient temperatures. Containers shall be charged to a fill density or super 
pressurization level within the range specified in the manufacturer’s listed man-
ual. 

ii.  Each agent container shall have a permanent nameplate or other permanent 

marking that indicates                                                                                                                     
a. For Halocarbon agent containers, the agent, tare and gross weights, and su-
perpressurization level (where applicable) of the container.                                                      
b. For Inert gas agent containers, the agent and the pressurization level of the 
container and nominal agent volume. 

iii. Containers connected in manifold, for Halocarbon clean agents in a multiple con-

tainer system, and supplying the same manifold outlet for distribution of the 
same agent shall be interchangeable and of one selected size and charge. 

iv. Containers connected in manifold, for Inert gas agents shall be permitted to uti-

lize multiple storage container sizes connected to a common manifold. 

v.  Storage temperatures shall not exceed or be less than the manufacturer’s listed 

limits. 

vi.  Clean agent containers shall be located as close to hazard as possible or in the 

protected room next to the exit. 

i.  Pipes and pipe connections shall be made of metal (seamless welding) and be 

able to withstand the pressures as specified and calculated and any low temper-
ature encountered. 

ii.  The test pressure for the Inert Gas Systems’ pipe between the cylinders and the 
area valve should have 1.5 times of the service pressure. (i.e. if 200-300 bar cyl-
inder – test pressure, then pipe pressure resistance should be 300-450 bar). The 
test pressure for the pipe between the area valve and the protected area should 
have 1.5 times of the service pressure (i.e. if 60 bar is test pressure – 90 bar 
should be pipe pressure resistance).  

iii. Fittings shall be calculated for the occurring service pressure. Fittings shall be 
suitable for deeper temperatures (approx. –50°C). In sections of the pipe that 
are subjected to static head pressure (closed pipe work) the service pressure 
must not be exceeded and if needed a safety valve shall be fitted.  

iv. The pipe work between the cylinder and area valve shall be marked by the man-
ufacturer, so that the identification according to the test certificates is possible 
after installation. Manifolds and distribution pipes may be marked as a kit by an 
authorized person. An unambiguous assignment to the test certificate shall be 
possible. Flexible pipes and hoses etc. shall only be used where fixed pipes are 
unsuitable. Flexible pipes and hoses shall be as short as possible and approved. 
v.  The inside and outside of pipes shall be effectively protected against corrosion if 
this is necessitated by environmental conditions. To protect sensitive machinery, 
e.g. computers, from corrosive particles in the pipe work, galvanized steel should 
be used as a minimum. 

vi. Special-alloy steels and/or suitable surface protection coatings shall be used if 

the use of pipes and connections made of steel does not provide sufficient corro-
sion protection. 

vii. The pipe work shall be arranged so that it cannot be damaged by its own weight, 
temperature fluctuations, vibration, release of gas or other installation inherent 
influences. 

viii.All pipe work shall be accessible. The gas installation pipe work shall be earthed. 

If necessary, potential equalization conductors (i.e. regarding non-conductive 
pipe joints) between all pipes shall be provided or the installation shall be 
earthed at different points (auxiliary equipotent bonding). 

ix. Pipes shall be secured especially near nozzles to prevent pipe movement due to 

the high pressure during discharge. 

12. PIPES AND 

FITTINGS 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 683 of 1348 

Table 9.16.: Clean Agent Systems Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

13.  NOZZLES 

i.  The selection of the type of nozzles, numbers, spacing etc., shall be as per the man-

ufacturer’s design specifications. 

ii.  Discharge nozzles shall be listed for their intended use. Listing criteria shall include 

flow characteristics, area coverage, height limits, and minimum pressures. Dis-
charge orifices and discharge orifice plates and inserts shall be of a material that is 
corrosion resistant to the agent used and the atmosphere in the intended applica-
tion. 

iii. Special corrosion-resistant materials or coatings shall be required in severely corro-

sive atmospheres. 

iv.  Discharge nozzles shall be permanently marked to identify the manufacturer as 

well as the type and size of the orifice. 

v.  Where clogging by external foreign materials is likely, discharge nozzles shall be 

provided with frangible discs, blowoff caps, or other suitable devices. These devic-
es shall provide an unobstructed opening upon system operation and shall be lo-
cated such that they will not injure personnel. 

14. FIRE        

DETECTION 
AND 
ALARM 

i.  Automatic detection shall be by any listed method or device capable of detecting 
and indicating heat, flame, smoke, combustible vapors, or an abnormal condition 
in the hazard, such as a process trouble, that is likely to produce fire. 

ii.  The fire detection, actuation and alarm system shall comply with Chapter 8. Fire 

Detection and Alarm Systems. 

iii.  Clean agent discharge shall be automatic. However, additional manual release sta-

tions shall be provided. 

iv.  All devices shall be located, installed, or suitably protected so that they are not 

subject to mechanical, chemical, or other damage that would render them inoper-
ative. 

v.  Audible and visual pre-discharge alarms shall be provided within the protected ar-
ea to give positive warning of impending discharge. The operation of the warning 
devices shall be continued after agent discharge until positive action has been tak-
en to acknowledge the alarm and proceed with appropriate action. 

vi.   Abort switches, where provided, shall be located within the protected area an 

near the means of egress for the area. The abort switch shall be of a type that re-
quires a constant manual pressure to cause abort. In all cases the normal and man-
ual emergency control shall override the abort function. Operation of the abort 
function shall result in both audible and distinct visual indications of system impair-
ment. The abort switch shall be clearly recognizable for the purpose intended. 

15. TIME       
DELAYS 

i.  For clean agent extinguishing systems, a pre-discharge alarm and time delay, suffi-

cient to allow the personnel evacuation prior to discharge, shall be provided. 

ii.  Time delays shall be used only for the evacuation of personnel or to prepare the 

hazard area for discharge. 

iii.  Warning and instruction signs at entrances to and inside protected areas shall be 

provided.  

 

Figure 9.41.: Warning Signs Outside Clean Agent protected Area 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 684 of 1348 

 

Figure 9.42: Typical Chemical (Halocarbon) Gas System  

Figure 9.43.: Typical Inert Gas System  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 685 of 1348 

 

Table 9.16.: Clean Agent Systems Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

16. GENERAL EPA 

i.  Must conform with OSHA 29 CFR 1910 Subpart L Sections 1910.160 and 

SAFETY       
RECOMMEN-
DATIONS FOR 
ALL CLEAN 
AGENTS AND 
FIRE             
SUPPRESSION 
AGENTS 

17.  APPLICATION 
OF CHEMICAL 
GASES 

 

1910.162. 

ii.  Per OSHA requirements, protective gear (SCBA) must be available in the event 

personnel must reenter the area. 

iii. Discharge testing should be strictly limited only to that which is essential to 

meet safety or performance requirements. 

iv. The agent should be recovered from the fire protection system in conjunction 

with testing or servicing, and recycled for later use or destroyed. 

v.  EPA (Environmental Protection Agency, USA) recommends that users consult 
Section VIII of the OSHA Technical Manual for information on selecting the ap-
propriate types of personal protective equipment for all listed fire suppression 
agents. EPA has no intention of duplicating or displacing OSHA coverage related 
to the use of personal protective equipment (e.g., respiratory protection), fire 
protection, hazard communication, worker training or any other occupational 
safety and health standard with respect to EPAs regulation of halon substitutes 
(Fire suppression agents). 

vi. The NFPA 2001 Standard for Clean Agent Fire Extinguishing Systems gives 

guidelines for blends that contain HFC-134a or HCFC-22 and other acceptable 
total flooding agents, rather than referring to HFC-134a or HCFC-22 alone. 

i.  The application of Halocarbon Agents shall comply with Table 9.16.D. 
ii.  The Halocarbon (Chemical) Agents and their application acceptable to Civil De-
fence are based on EPA’s SNAP (Significant New Alternatives Policy) program, 
as of October 2016.  

iii. The EPA continuously reviews and updates their policy of these alternate sub-

stitutes and same shall be adopted by Civil Defence based on their periodic 
evaluation of environmental and health risks, including factors such as ozone 
depletion potential, global warming potential, toxicity, flammability, exposure 
potential and acceptance in occupied spaces etc., of all the fire suppression 
agents. 

iv. Where EPA’s SNAP or manufacturers comment or recommend any of the pre-

Install ventilation 
Immediate spillage cleaning in accordance with good hygiene practices 

cautionary and safety measures such as 
a.  Avoid unnecessary exposure 
b.  Container labels of potential hazard and handling procedures to reduce risk 
c.  Only manual activation in occupied areas 
d. 
e. 
f.  Training of the personnel involved 
 
for any clean agent, such installations shall not be acceptable in occupied spac-
es unless all of the additional justifications mentioned below are furnished to 
Civil Defence acceptance and approval. 
 
a.  NOC from concerned authority such as Municipality environment control 

department’s disposal of hazardous wastes. 

b.  NOC from concerned authority  such as Health Authority  which ensures 
that the clean agent is not toxic to humans and animals before and after 
release. 

c.  Manufacturer's training certificate for the engineers and technicians who 

are involved in handling, installing, maintaining and servicing such clean 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 686 of 1348 

 

Table 9.16.D.: Application of Chemical (Halocarbon) Agents 

HALOCARBON 
AGENT 

COMMERCIAL 
NAME 

TECHNICAL INFORMATION  EPA COMMENTS 

1. HFC 227ea 

FM-200,            
FE-227,                   
MH 227,        
Solkaflam 227 

i.  Consists of Carbon, Flu-

vi.  Use of this agent should be in ac-

orine and Hydrogen 

ii.  Super-pressurized with 

Nitrogen to 2482 Kpa 

iii. Colorless, Odorless and 

cordance with the safety guide-
lines in the latest edition of the 
NFPA 2001 Standard for Clean 
Agent. Fire Extinguishing Systems.  

Electrically Non-
conductive 

vii.  See additional comments i, ii, iii, 

iv, v. in Table 9.16.16. 

iv. Operating temperature 

is -12.2 0C  to 65.6 0C 

v.  Stored in liquid form at 

24-42 bar  

i.  Boiling point of 49 oC 
ii.  Stored in liquid form, 

Super-pressurized with 
Nitrogen to 25 bar  

Novec 1230 

2. C6-
PERFLUORO-
KETONE 
*1,1,1,2,2,4,5,5,5-
nonafluoro-4-
(trifluoromethyl)-
3-pentanone+ 

3. HFC 125,  
HFC-227ea with 
0.1% d-limonene 

NAF S 125,  
NAF S 227 
ECARO-25,  
 

i.  Super-pressurized with 

Nitrogen to 2482 Kpa 

ii.  Colorless, Odorless and 

Electrically Non-
conductive 

iii. Operating temperature 

is -12.2 oC  to 65.6 oC 

iv.  Stored in liquid form at 

24 bar  

iii. Use of the agent should be in ac-
cordance with the safety guide-
lines in the latest edition of the 
NFPA 2001 Standard for Clean 
Agent Fire Extinguishing Systems.  

iv. For operations that install and 

maintain total flooding systems 
using this agent, EPA recommends 
the following: - install and use ade-
quate ventilation; clean up all spills 
immediately in accordance with 
good industrial hygiene practices; 
and provide training for safe han-
dling procedures to all employees 
that would be likely to handle con-
tainers of the agent or extinguish-
ing units filled with the agent. 

v.  See additional comments i, ii, iii, iv, 

v. in Table 9.16.16. 

v.  Use of the agent should be in ac-
cordance with the safety guide-
lines in the latest edition of the 
NFPA 2001 Standard for Clean 
Agent Fire Extinguishing Systems.  

vi.  Extinguisher bottles should be 

clearly labeled with the potential 
hazards associated with the use of 
HFC-125 and d-limonene, as well 
as handling procedures to reduce 
risk resulting from these hazards. 
vii.  See additional comments i, ii, iii, 

iv, v. in Table 9.16.16. 

4. HFC 125 

FE-25 

i.  Super-pressurized with 

v.  Use of this agent should be in ac-

Nitrogen to 2482 Kpa 

ii.  Colorless, Odorless and 

Electrically Non-
conductive 

iii. Operating temperature 

is -12.2 oC  to 65.6 oC 

iv.  Stored in liquid form at 

24 bar  

cordance with the safety guide-
lines in the latest edition of the 
NFPA 2001 Standard for Clean 
Agent. Fire Extinguishing Systems.  
vi. See additional comments i, ii, iii, iv, 

v. in Table 9.16.16. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 687 of 1348 

Table 9.16.D.: Application of Chemical (Halocarbon) Agents 

HALOCARBON 
AGENT 

COMMERCIAL 
NAME 

TECHNICAL INFORMATION  EPA COMMENTS 

5. HCFC Blend A 

NAF-S-III 

i.  Super-pressurized with 

v.  Use of this agent should be in ac-

Nitrogen to 2482 Kpa 

ii.  Colorless, Odorless and 

Electrically Non-
conductive 

iii. Operating temperature 

is -12.2 oC  to 65.6 oC 

iv. Stored in liquid form at 

24 bar  

cordance with the safety guide-
lines in the latest edition of the 
NFPA 2001 Standard for Clean 
Agent. Fire Extinguishing Systems.  

vi.  See additional comments i, ii, iii, 

iv, v. in Table 9.16.16. 

NOT ACCEPTABLE BY CIVIL 
DEFENCE 

NA 

NOT ACCEPTABLE 
AGENTS 

HFC 32,  
HCFC 22 
FM-100,  
HFC 227 BC, 
Gelled HFC, 
Halotron II, 
FE-36,  
C3F8, 
C4F10,  
CF31 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 688 of 1348 

Table 9.16: Clean Agent Systems Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

18. APPLICATION 

OF INERT  
GASES 

i.  Application of Inert Gas Agents shall comply with Table 9.16.E. 
ii.  Inert gas agents are compressed and stored in very high pressurized containers. 
All containers shall be listed for such high pressures, allowable filling density and 
operating temperatures. 

iii. Inert gas containers shall not be located in the hazard they protect. The expo-
sure to high temperatures of fires cause rupture and explosions of containers. 

iv. The rooms where inert gas containers are stored, shall be temperature con-

trolled and protected with sprinklers or clean agents. 

v.  The Inert Agents and their application acceptable to Civil Defence are based on 
EPA’s SNAP (Significant New Alternatives Policy) program, as of October 2016. 

vi. The EPA continuously reviews and updates their policy of these alternate substi-
tutes and same shall be adopted by Civil Defence based on their periodic evalua-
tion of environmental and health risks, including factors such as ozone depletion 
potential, global warming potential, toxicity, flammability, exposure potential 
and acceptance in occupied spaces etc., of all the fire suppression agents. 

vii. Where EPA’s SNAP or manufacturers comment or recommend any of the pre-

Install ventilation 
Immediate spillage cleaning in accordance with good hygiene practices 

cautionary and safety measures such as 
a.  Avoid unnecessary exposure 
b.  Asphyxiation at high concentrations 
c.  High CO2 
d.  Low residual oxygen levels 
e.  Container labels of potential hazard and handling procedures to reduce risk 
f.  Only manual activation in occupied areas 
g. 
h. 
i.  Training of the personnel involved 
j.  Eye wash,  
 
for any clean agent, such installations shall not be acceptable in occupied spaces 
unless all of the additional justifications mentioned below are furnished to Civil 
Defence acceptance and approval. 
 
a.  NOC from concerned authority such as Municipality environment control 

department’s disposal of hazardous wastes. 

b.  NOC from concerned authority  such as Health Authority  which ensures that 
the clean agent is not toxic to humans and animals before and after release. 
c.  Manufacturer's training certificate for the engineers and technicians who are 

involved in handling, installing, maintaining and servicing such clean agent 
installations. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 689 of 1348 

 

Table 9.16.E.: Application of Inert Gas Agents 

HALOCARBON 
AGENT 

COMMER-
CIAL NAME 

TECHNICAL INFORMATION 

EPA COMMENTS 

1. IG-01 

Argotec, 
Inert Gas 
Blend C. 

i.  Density- 1.165 kg/m3 
ii.  Does not mix in reservoirs 
iii. Low friction loss 
iv. Cylinder pressure –200 bar 

2. NITROGEN 
     IG 100  

IG 100 
NN 100 

i.  Density- 1.165 kg/m3 
ii.  Does not mix in reservoirs 
iii. Low friction loss 
iv. Cylinder pressure –200 bar 

3 IG 541 

INERGEN 

i.  Density- 1.418 kg/m3 
ii.  Does not mix in reservoirs 
iii. Low friction loss 
iv. Cylinder pressure –300 bar 

4. ARGONITE 
     IG 55 

IG 55 

i.  Density- 1.412 kg/m3 
ii.  Does not mix in reservoirs 
iii. Low friction loss 
iv. Cylinder pressure –300 bar 

v.  Use of this agent should be in 

accordance with the safety 
guidelines in the latest edition 
of the NFPA 2001 Standard for 
Clean Agent. Fire Extinguishing 
Systems.  

vi.  See additional comments i, ii,  

v. in Table 9.16.16. 

v.  Use of this agent should be in 

accordance with the safety 
guidelines in the latest edition 
of the NFPA 2001 Standard for 
Clean Agent. Fire Extinguishing 
Systems.  

vi.  See additional comments i, ii,  

v. in Table 9.16.16. 

v.  Use of this agent should be in 

accordance with the safety 
guidelines in the latest edition 
of the NFPA 2001 Standard for 
Clean Agent Fire Extinguishing 
Systems.  

vi.  This agent contains CO2, which 

is intended to increase blood 
oxygenation and cerebral blood 
flow in low oxygen atmos-
pheres. 

vii.   The design concentration 

should result in no more than 
5% CO2.  

viii. See additional comments i, ii,  

v. in Table 9.16.16. 

v.  Use of this agent should be in 

accordance with the safety 
guidelines in the latest edition 
of the NFPA 2001 Standard for 
Clean Agent. Fire Extinguishing 
Systems.  

vi.  See additional comments i, ii,  

v. in Table 9.16.16. 

FS 0140 
ETC. 

NOT ACCEPTABLE BY CIVIL                 
DEFENCE 

NA 

5. INERT GAS AND 
POWDERED        
AEROSOL 
BLENDS 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 690 of 13483.15.  Other Extinguishing Agents and System 

 
3.15.1. 

 
3.15.2. 

 
3.15.3. 

 
3.15.4. 

 

 

 The requirements for various other Extinguishing System material, design, installa-
tion shall be as per this section and Table 9.17. 

 The fire suppression Agents and their application acceptable to Civil Defence are 
based on EPA’s SNAP (Significant New Alternatives Policy) program, as of October 
2016. 

 The EPA continuously reviews and updates their policy of these alternate substi-
tutes and same shall be adopted by Civil Defence based on their periodic evalua-
tion of environmental and health risks, including factors such as ozone depletion 
potential, global warming potential, toxicity, flammability, exposure potential and 
acceptance in occupied spaces etc., of all the fire suppression agents. 

 Where EPA’s SNAP or manufacturers comment or recommend any of the precau-
tionary and safety measures such as 

a.  Avoid unnecessary exposure 
b.  Asphyxiation at high concentrations 
c.  High CO2 
d.  Low residual oxygen levels 
e.  Container labels of potential hazard and handling procedures to reduce risk 
f.   Only manual activation in occupied areas 
g.  Install ventilation 
h.  Immediate spillage cleaning in accordance with good hygiene practices 
i.   Training of the personnel involved 
g.  Eye wash,  

for any clean agent, such installations shall not be acceptable in occupied spaces 
unless all of the additional justifications mentioned below are furnished to Civil 
Defence acceptance and approval. 

a.  NOC from concerned authority such as Municipality environment control de-

partment’s disposal of hazardous wastes. 

b.  NOC from concerned authority  such as Health Authority  which ensures that 
the clean agent is not toxic to humans and animals before and after release. 
c.   Manufacturer's training certificate for the engineers and technicians who are 
involved in handling, installing, maintaining and servicing such clean agent in-
stallations. 

 

 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 691 of 1348 

Table 9.17.: Other Extinguishing Systems Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

EPA COMMENTS 

i.  Design, Calculations, Design Concentra-

iii. System design must adhere to 

tions, Materials, Installation, Testing, 
Inspection and maintenance shall be as 
per the manufacturer’s instructions and 
listed manual. 

ii.  All the material and design manuals 

shall be listed and approved by Civil De-
fence. 

OSHA 1910.162(b)(5) and NFPA 
Standard 12 

i.  Design, Calculations, Design Concentra-

vi. Use of this agent should be in 

tions, Materials, Installation, Testing, 
Inspection and maintenance shall be as 
per NFPA 2010 and the manufacturer’s 
instructions and listed manual. 

ii.  All the material and design manual shall 
be listed and approved by Civil Defence. 
iii. All system components shall be located 
to maintain no less than minimum clear-
ances from energized electrical parts in 
accordance with ANSI C2, NFPA 70 and 
29 CFR 1910, subpart S. 

iv. Aerosol shall not be installed in the fol-

lowing locations where 
a.  Deep-seated fires in Class A materials 
b.  Certain chemicals or mixtures of 

chemicals, such as cellulose nitrate 
and gunpowder, that are capable of 
rapid oxidation in the absence of air. 
c.  Reactive metals such as lithium, sodi-

um, potassium, magnesium, titani-
um, zirconium, uranium, and plutoni-
um. 

d.  Metal hydrides 
e.  Chemicals capable of undergoing 

autothermal decomposition, such as 
certain organic peroxides and hydra-
zine. 

v.  Condensed aerosol generators shall not 
be used to protect classified hazards or 
similar spaces containing flammable 
liquids or dusts that can be present in 
explosive air–fuel mixtures unless the 
generators are specifically listed for use 
in those environments. 

accordance with the safety 
guidelines in the latest edition 
of the NFPA 2010 standard for 
Aerosol Extinguishing Systems.  
vii. For establishments manufactur-
ing the agent or filling, installing, 
or servicing containers or sys-
tems to be used in total flooding 
applications, EPA recommends 
the following: adequate ventila-
tion should be in place to reduce 
airborne exposure to constitu-
ents of agent; an eye wash foun-
tain and quick drench facility 
should be close to the produc-
tion area; training for safe han-
dling procedures should be pro-
vided to all employees that 
would be likely to handle con-
tainers of the agent or extin-
guishing units filled with the 
agent; workers responsible for 
clean up should allow for maxi-
mum settling of all particulates 
before reentering area and wear 
appropriate protective equip-
ment; and - all spills should be 
cleaned up immediately in ac-
cordance with good industrial 
hygiene practices.  

viii. See additional comments i, ii, 

iii, iv, v. in Table 9.16.16. 

1. CARBON  DIOXIDE 

2.  POWDERED     
AEROSOLS, D 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 692 of 1348 

Table 9.17.: Other Extinguishing Systems Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

EPA COMMENTS 

i.  Conduct an evaluation of foreseeable conditions 

of end use. 

ii.  Determine that the physical or chemical proper-

ties or other technical constraints of the other 
available agents preclude their use. 

iii.   Determine that human exposure to the other 
alternative extinguishing agents may result in 
failure to meet applicable use conditions.  

iv.   Use of this agent should be in accordance with 
the safety guidelines in the latest edition of the 
NFPA 2010 standard for Aerosol Extinguishing 
Systems.  

v.    For establishments manufacturing the agent or 
filling, installing, or servicing containers or sys-
tems to be used in total flooding applications, 
EPA recommends the following: adequate venti-
lation should be in place to reduce airborne ex-
posure to constituents of agent; an eye wash 
fountain and quick drench facility should be 
close to the production area; training for safe 
handling procedures should be provided to all 
employees that would be likely to handle con-
tainers of the agent or extinguishing units filled 
with the agent; workers responsible for clean up 
should allow for maximum settling of all particu-
lates before reentering area and wear appropri-
ate protective equipment; and - all spills should 
be cleaned up immediately in accordance with 
good industrial hygiene practices.  

viii. See additional comments i, ii, iii, iv, v. in Table 

9.16.16. 

NA 

ACCEPTABLE ONLY IN  
UNOCCUPIED AREAS (See 
section 4.1.15.) 

3. OTHER                

POWDERED         
AEROSOLS SUCH 
AS A, C, F, G, E 
AND CONDENSED 
AEROSOL          
SYSTEMS 

4.  MODULAR TYPE                   

NOT ACCEPTABLE BY     
CIVIL DEFENCE 

EXTINGUISHERS 
WITH SPRINKLER 
HEADS OR OTHER 
ACTUATING      
DEVICES 

 

Figure 9.44.: Typical Modular Type Extinguishers which are not Acceptable  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 693 of 1348 

4.   Application of Fire Protection Systems 

 
4.1.  General Requirements 

 

4.1.1. 

The selection and application of Fire Protection systems should be carefully executed 
upon detailed analysis of the Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) of the materials in-
volved in the hazard.  

 
4.1.2.  Water based fire protection systems shall not be installed or used where water reac-

tive materials are stored and handled.  

 
4.1.3.  Medium- and high-expansion foam systems shall not be used on fires in the following 

hazards:                                                  

a.    Chemicals, such as cellulose nitrate, that release sufficient oxygen or other oxidizing 

agents to sustain combustion. 

b.  Energized unenclosed electrical equipment 
c.  Water-reactive metals such as sodium, potassium, and NaK (sodium-potassium alloys) 
d.  Hazardous water-reactive materials, such as triethyl-aluminum and phosphorus pent-

oxide 

e.  Liquefied flammable gas 

 
4.1.4.  All non-storage and non-industrial occupancies with more than 20,000 m² plot area 

(See Definition in Section 4.1.10.) usually with a cluster of all types of buildings shall be 
provided with Yard Fire Hydrant Systems as per Section 3.11.  

 
4.1.5.  Auxiliary Room fire protection Systems as required by Table 9.30. shall be applicable 

and shall be required to be installed only when the main building housing these auxilia-
ry rooms is fully protected by fire protection systems as per Table 9.18. to Table 9.28. 

 
4.1.6.  All storage and industrial occupancies with more than 3600 m² built-up area (See Defi-

nitions in Section 4.1. 11.), or storage and industrial occupancies which have built-up 
ground floor areas that are more than 100 m away from existing, functional and avail-
able hydrant/s  shall be provided with Yard Fire Hydrant Systems as per Section 3.11.  

 
4.1.7. 

Storage and Industrial occupancies having more than 3 floors above the fire access 
Level shall be fully protected with Automatic Sprinkler System, irrespective of their 
built-up areas. 

 
4.1.8.  All High Hazard Industrial, Storage and special purpose occupancies not addressed in 

this code, a Fire risk analysis report of the facility and the required fire suppression 
systems, prepared by the Civil Defence approved House of Expertise shall be furnished 
for Civil Defence review and approval. 

 
4.1.9.  Guidelines in this section are minimum requirements for the application of various Fire 

Protection Systems. The protection criteria, design criteria, required design density, 
types of suppression methods and Fire Pump capacities may vary and shall be verified 
with the Civil Defence engineers and the relevant NFPA references such as NFPA 11, 
NFPA 13, NFPA 14, NFPA 15, NFPA 16, NFPA 20, NFPA 2001, etc. shall be consulted. 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 694 of 1348 

 

4.1.10.  Plot Area 
 

The plot area is the total area available under the ‘Plot Number’, including the ground floor 
area on which buildings and structures are built, set back areas, landscaping areas, parking are-
as and open spaces available part of such that plot area. 

 
4.1.11.  Built-up Area 
 

The total floor areas of the buildings and structures including carpet areas, wall thickness, col-
umn thickness, stair shafts, elevator and service shafts  of all the floors, including mezzanines. 

 
4.1.12.  Built-up ground floor area 
 

The total ground floor area  alone upon which the individual buildings and structures are built. 
It is the total ground floor area of the individual building and structure including carpet areas, 
wall thickness, column thickness, stair shafts, elevator and service shafts  of the ground floor 
alone. 

 
4.1.13.  Sum of built-up ground floor areas 
 

The sum of total ground floor areas  alone upon which the buildings and structures are built. It 
is the accumulative total ground floor area of the various building and structures, within the 
same plot, excluding separated service blocks, security guard house and separated wash-
rooms. 

 
4.1.14.  Unit Compartment Area 
 

The total built-up ground floor area  alone of the individual unit which is separated by adjacent 
units with a fire resistance rated separation. It is the total built-up ground floor area of such an 
individual unit of the multi-unit building or structure. 

 
4.1.15.  Carpet Area 
 

The total occupiable area inside the built-up area, excluding wall thickness, column thickness, 
stair shaft, elevator shaft and service shaft. 

 
4.1.16.  Unoccupied Area 
 

Area that is intended only for equipment and machinery providing services with periodic visits 

by personnel for repair and maintenance.  However,  with respect to the use of Clean agent, 

Aerosols, CO2 and other fire suppression systems, the LV rooms, transformer rooms, telephone 

rooms, generator rooms and other such equipment/  machinery rooms located in the occupied 

buildings or attached to occupied buildings, are not considered as unoccupied areas because of 

the proximity of these rooms to public movement and the  possible adverse effects of fire sup-

pression agents.   

4.1.17.  Common Fire Pump and Fire Water Tank 
 

Where multiple buildings at single plot or multiple plots are owned by a single owner, the fire 

pump set and fire water tank shall be permitted to be common, provided the arrangement 

satisfies the required hydraulic calculations and the involved plots and property are managed 

and maintained  by such single owner. 

4.1.18.  Master Water Tank 
 

Developers are encouraged to consider master water tanks having a size of a minimum of 

500,000 gallons., common to the entire development, from which individual buildings can tap 

from to individual pump rooms and Civil Defence can refill their fire trucks during emergencies 

in that development or nearby developments. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 695 of 1348 

4.   Application of Fire Protection Systems 

 
4.2.  Super Highrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

 
4.2.1. 

Super Highrise buildings having a building height greater than 90 m, of any occu-
pancy classification shall be provided with Fire protection Systems in compliance 
with Table 9.18. and Auxiliary Rooms Fire Protection Systems as per Table 9.30. 

Table 9.18.: Super Highrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

CATEGORY 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

i.  Sprinklers shall be provided 

throughout the building including 
basements and podiums (open as 
well as closed) as per Section 3.5. 
ii.  Auxiliary rooms and various areas 
of the building shall be protected 
as per Table 9.30. 

iii. The wet riser System shall be pro-
vided throughout the building as 
per  Section 3.4. 

iv. Wet risers shall be provided with 
High Zones and Low zones accord-
ing to pressure limitations as per          
Table 9.6.13. 

v.  Wet risers shall be interconnected 
both at the lowest level and at the 
highest level of each zone. 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

ix. Where a fire pump set is combined 
and serves both yard hydrants and 
internal building systems, the capaci-
ty of the first fire pump set at the 
lowest level of the building shall be 
1000 gpm  (Irrespective of number of 
stairs and standpipes) at 17  bar. 

x.  Where a fire pump set is combined 
and serves both yard hydrants and 
internal building systems, the com-
bined water tank at the lowest level 
of the building shall have a capacity 
of 60 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water  level detection, dedi-
cated direct breeching inlet for refill 
and instantaneous refilling arrange-
ment for the utility supply. 

vi. A multi level Pump set arrange-

xi. Where a fire pump set only serves 

ment shall be provided every 90 m 
height from the lowest fire pump 
set level as per Table 9.6.13. 

vii. Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provid-

ed where the plot area exceeds 
20,000 m2 , as per Section 3.11.  

viii.Yard hydrants shall not be re-

quired where infrastructure yard 
hydrants are available within 60 m 
of such towers. Tapping from ex-
isting yard hydrant network shall 
be permitted to extend the yard 
hydrants to comply with coverage 
requirements. 

internal building systems, the capaci-
ty of the pump sets  located vertically 
at every 90 m intermediate intervals 
from the lowest level fire pump shall 
be  750 gpm if there are 2 standpipes 
and 1000  gpm, if there are more than 
2 standpipes, at pressure as required 
to satisfy 6.9 bar at  the most remote 
landing valve. 

xii. Fire water tank shall be provided for 
every upper level pump sets (At eve-
ry 90 m intervals). Such upper level 
water tanks shall be for 30 minutes 
operation, complete with automatic 
low water level detection, instanta-
neous refilling arrangement, pump-
ing and piping to refill tanks from 
lower levels. 

A.  SUPER           
HIGHRISE     
BUILDING WITH 
PLOT AREA           
EXCEEDING 
20,000 M2  

 
 

 

 
 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 696 of 1348 

4.   Application of Fire Protection Systems 

 
4.2.  Super Highrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

 

Table 9.18.: Super Highrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

CATEGORY 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

i.  Sprinklers shall be provided 

throughout the building including 
basements and podiums (open as 
well as closed) as per Section 3.5. 
ii.  Auxiliary rooms and various areas 
of the building shall be protected 
as per Table 9.30. 

iii. The wet riser System shall be pro-
vided throughout the building as 
per  Section 3.4. 

iv. Wet risers shall be provided with 
High Zones and Low zones accord-
ing to pressure limitations as per          
Table 9.6.13. 

v.  Wet risers shall be interconnected 
both at the lowest level and at the 
highest level of each zone. 

vi. A multi level Pump set arrange-

ment shall be provided every 90 m 
height from the lowest fire pump 
set level as per Table 9.6.13. 

x. 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

vii.  The capacity of the first fire pump set 

at the lowest level of the building 
shall be 1000 gpm  (Irrespective of 
the number of standpipes) at 17  bar. 
viii.  The water tank at the lowest level of 
the  building shall have a capacity of 
60 minutes  of operation, complete 
with low water  level detection, dedi-
cated direct breeching inlet for refill 
and instantaneous refilling arrange-
ment for the utility supply.. 

ix.  The capacity of the upper level 

pump sets  located at every 90 m 
intervals from the lowest level fire 
pump, shall be  750 gpm if there 
are 2 standpipes and 1000  gpm if 
there are more than 2 standpipes, 
at pressure as required to satisfy 
6.9 bar at  the most remote land-
ing valve. 
Fire water tank shall be provided 
for every upper level pump sets 
(At every 90 m intervals). Such up-
per level water tanks shall be for 
30 minutes operation, complete 
with automatic low water level 
detection, instantaneous refilling 
arrangement, pumping and piping 
to refill tanks from lower levels. 

 B. SUPER HIGHRISE 
BUILDING WITH 
PLOT AREA LESS 
THAN 20,000 M2         

 

OR  
 
C.  WHERE SUPER      

HIGHRISE    
BUILDING IS    
PROVIDED WITH 
YARD HYDRANT 
SYSTEM,           
IRRESPECTIVE 
OF PLOT  AREA, 
AS PART OF           
INFRASTRUC-
TURE DEVELOP-
MENT 

 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 697 of 1348 

4.3.  Highrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

 
4.3.1.  Highrise building having building height of more than 23 m but less than 90 m, of 

any occupancy classification shall be provided with Fire protection Systems in com-
pliance with Table 9.19. and Auxiliary Rooms Fire Protection Systems as per Table 
9.30 

 
 

Table 9.19.: Highrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

CATEGORY 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP 
SET AND FIRE WATER 
TANK CAPACITIES 

A.  HIGHRISE  BUILDING     

HAVING HEIGHT OF MORE 
THAN 45 M BUT BELOW 
90 M FROM LOWEST 
PUMP SET  LEVEL  

 
AND 
 
     PLOT  AREA EXCEEDING 

20,000 M2 

 

 

B. HIGHRISE  BUILDING     

HAVING HEIGHT OF MORE 
THAN 45 M BUT BELOW   
90 M FROM LOWEST 
PUMP SET  LEVEL  

 
AND  
 
     PLOT AREA LESS THAN 

20,000 M2 

 
 
 
      

 

i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-
out the building including basements 
and podiums (open as well as closed) 
as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  Auxiliary rooms and various areas of 

the building shall be protected as per             
Table 9.30. 

iii. The wet riser System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per       
Section 3.4. 

iv. The wet risers shall be provided with 
looped High Zones and Low zones ac-
cording to the pressure limitations as 
per Table 9.6.13. 

v.  Wet risers shall be interconnected 

both at lowest level and at the highest 
level of each zone. 

vi. Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided 

as per Section 3.11. 

vii. Yard hydrants shall not be required 
where infrastructure yard hydrants 
are available within 60 m of such tow-
ers. Tapping from existing yard hy-
drant network shall be permitted to 
extend the yard hydrants to comply 
with coverage requirements. 

i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-
out the building including basements 
and podiums (Open as well as closed) 
as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  Auxiliary rooms and various areas of 

viii.  Where a fire pump set 
is combined and serves 
yard hydrants and inter-
nal building systems, 
the capacity of the fire 
pump set shall be 1000 
gpm (Irrespective of 
number of stairs) at 
pressure as required to 
satisfy 6.9 bar at the 
most remote landing 
valve. 

ix.  Where a fire pump set 
is combined and serves 
yard hydrants and inter-
nal building systems, 
the combined water 
tank shall have capacity 
of 60 minutes of opera-
tion, complete with low 
water level detection, 
dedicated direct 
breeching inlet for refill-
ing and instantaneous 
refilling arrangement 
for the utility supply.  

vi.  The capacity of the fire 
pump set shall be 750 
gpm if there are 2 stand-
pipes and 1000 gpm if 
there are more than 2 
standpipes, at pressure 
as required to satisfy 6.9 
bar at the most remote 
landing valve. 

vii.  Water tank shall have 

capacity of 60 minutes of 
operation, complete 
with low water level de-
tection, dedicated direct 
breeching inlet for refill-
ing and instantaneous 
refilling arrangement for 
the utility water supply. 

the building shall be protected as per             
Table 9.30. 

iii. A wet riser System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Sec-
tion 3.4. 

iv. The wet risers shall be provided with 
High Zones and Low zones according 
to pressure limitations as per Table 
9.6.13. 

v.  The wet risers shall be interconnected 
both at lowest level and at the highest 
level of each zone. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 698 of 1348 

 

Table 9.19.: Highrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

CATEGORY 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

C.  HIGHRISE  BUILDING 
HAVING HEIGHT OF 
MORE THAN 23 M 
BUT BELOW 45 M AND 
PLOT AREA                 
EXCEEDING  20,000 M2 

 
 

i.  Sprinklers shall be provided 

throughout the building including 
basements and podiums (open as 
well as closed) as per   Section 3.5. 
ii.  Auxiliary rooms and various areas 
of the building shall be protected 
as per Table 9.30. 

iii. A wet riser System shall be provid-

ed throughout the building as per                  
Section 3.4. 

iv. The wet risers shall be intercon-

nected both at lowest level and at 
the highest level of each zone. 

v.  Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provid-

ed as per Section 3.11. 

vi. Yard hydrants shall not be required 
where infrastructure yard hydrants 
are available within 60 m of such 
towers. 

D.  HIGHRISE BUILDING          

i.  Sprinklers shall be provided 

HAVING HEIGHT OF 
MORE THAN 23 M 
BUT BELOW 45 M  
AND PLOT AREA LESS 
THAN 20,000 M2 

throughout the building including 
basements and podiums (open as 
well as closed) as per Section 3.5. 
ii.  Auxiliary rooms and various areas 
of the building shall be protected 
as per Table 9.30. 

iii. A wet riser System shall be provid-

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET 
AND FIRE WATER TANK     
CAPACITIES 

vii.  Where a fire pump set is com-

bined and serves yard hy-
drants and internal building 
systems, capacity of the fire 
pump set shall be 1000 gpm 
irrespective of number of 
standpipes, at pressure as 
required to satisfy 6.9 bar at 
the most remote landing 
valve and the yard hydrant. 

viii.  The combined water tank 
shall have capacity of 60 
minutes of operation, com-
plete with low water level 
detection, dedicated direct 
breeching inlet for refilling 
and instantaneous refilling 
arrangement for utility water 
supply. 

v. 

The capacity of the fire pump 
set shall be 750 gpm if the 
building has 2 standpipes and 
1000 gpm if the building has 
more than 2 standpipes. 

vi.  Pressure shall be as required to 

satisfy 6.9 bar at the most re-
mote landing valve. 

vii.  The water tank shall have a 

capacity of 60 minutes of oper-
ation, complete with low water 
level detection, dedicated di-
rect breeching inlet and instan-
taneous refilling arrangement 
for utility water supply.. 

ed throughout the building as per                  
Section 3.4. 

iv. The wet risers shall be intercon-

nected both at lowest level and at 
the highest level of each zone. 

 

Points to Ponder 

Photo Caption 
 

In some of the full scale fires, a water tank meant for 60 minutes of operation du-

ration, was emptied in 15 minutes due to the operation (bursting, activation and 

spraying) of several sprinklers, quickly exceeding the design area of the sprinkler 

operation. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 699 of 1348 

4.4.  Midrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

 
4.4.1.  Midrise buildings (Assembly, Education, Healthcare, Mercantile, Hotel, Daycare, 

Mixed and Multiple and High depth underground buildings) having a building 
height from more than 15 m to less than 23 m shall be provided with Fire protec-
tion Systems in compliance with Table 9.20.a., and Auxiliary Rooms Fire Protection 
Systems as per Table 9.30. 

 

PREDOMINANT 
OCCUPANCY 

A.  ASSEMBLY  

GROUP A, B, C.  

 
B.  EDUCATION  

GROUP A, B, C.  

 
C.  HEALTHCARE  

Table 9.20.a.: Midrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET 
AND FIRE WATER TANK                    
CAPACITIES 

1. IF PLOT AREA IS LESS THAN       

20,000  m2 

1. IF PLOT AREA IS LESS THAN     

20,000 m2 

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

 
v.   The capacity of the fire pump set 

MULTIPLE          
OCCUPANCIES  

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

 
vi.  Where a fire pump set is combined 

out the building including base-
ments, podiums (Open as well as 
closed) as per Section 3.5. 

GROUP A  

ii.  Auxiliary rooms and various areas of 

 
D.  MERCANTILE       

GROUP A, B 

 
E.  HOTEL           

the building shall be protected as per         
Table 9.30. 

iii. A wet riser System shall be provided 
throughout the building as per             
Section 3.4. 

GROUP A, B, C.  

iv. The wet risers shall be interconnect-

 
F.  DAY CARE GROUP 

A, B, C.  

 
G.  MIXED AND   

ed at the highest level. 

 
 
2. IF PLOT AREA IS MORE THAN 

20,000m2   

 
H.  HIGH DEPTH      

UNDERGROUND 
BUILDINGS  OR         
BUILDINGS WITH  
3 OR MORE       
BASEMENTS 

out the building including base-
ments, podiums (Open as well as 
closed) as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  Auxiliary rooms and various areas of 

the building shall be protected as per         
Table 9.30. 

iii. A wet riser System shall be provided 
throughout the building as per             
Section 3.4. 

iv. The wet risers shall be interconnect-

ed at the highest level. 

v.  Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided 

as per Section 3.11. 

vi. Yard hydrants shall not be required 
where infrastructure yard hydrants 
are available within 60 m of such 
building. In this scenario, require-
ments of Table 9.20.a.1. shall apply. 

 
 

 

 

shall be 750 gpm if there are 2 
standpipes, 1000 gpm if there are 
more than 2 standpipes at a pres-
sure as required to satisfy 6.9 bar 
at the most remote landing valve. 
vi.  The water tank shall have a capaci-
ty of 45 minutes of operation, com-
plete with low water level detec-
tion, dedicated direct breeching 
inlet for refilling and instantaneous 
refilling arrangement for utility wa-
ter supply.. 

 
2. IF PLOT AREA IS MORE THAN 

20,000 m2  

and serves yard hydrants and in-
ternal building systems, capacity 
of the fire pump set shall be 1000 
gpm irrespective of number of 
standpipes at pressure as required 
to satisfy 6.9 bar at the most re-
mote landing valve and the hy-
drant. 

vii.  Where a fire pump set is com-

bined and serves yard hydrants 
and internal building systems, the 
combined water tank shall have 
capacity of 60 minutes of opera-
tion, complete with low water 
level detection, dedicated direct 
breeching inlet for refilling and 
instantaneous refilling arrange-
ment for utility water supply. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 700 of 1348 

4.4.  Midrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

 
4.4.2.  Midrise buildings (Residential, Labour Accommodation, Staff Accommodation, Hos-

tels, Business and Animal Housing) having a building height from more than 15 m 
to less than 23 m shall be provided with Fire protection Systems in compliance 
with Table 9.20.b., and Auxiliary Rooms Fire Protection Systems as per Table 9.30. 

Table 9.20.b. : Midrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

PRE         
DOMINANT          
OCCUPANCY 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

1.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA 

IS UP TO 900  m2 

1.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA IS 

UP TO 900  m2 

 
i.  The dry riser + Hose Reel system  
shall be provided throughout the 
building as per Section 3.2. and Sec-
tion 3.3. 

ii.  Dry risers shall be interconnected at 

 
iii. The capacity of the fire pump set shall 
be 50 gpm at a pressure as required to 
satisfy 4.5 bar at the most remote Hose 
valve. 

iv. The water tank shall have capacity of 45 

A.    RESIDENTIAL 
GROUP A, B, 
C.  

 
(APARTMENTS, 
LABOR ACCOM-
MODATION, 
STAFF                 
ACCOMMODA-
TION,                    
HOSTEL ) 
 
B.   HEALTHCARE 
GROUP B, C.  

 
C.   MERCANTILE 

GROUP C 
(KIOSKS) 

 
D.   BUSINESS      
GROUP A, B, 
C.  

 
E.   ANIMAL 

HOUSING 
GROUP A, B, 
C.  

 
 

 

 

 

the highest level. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
2.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA 

IS 901  m2 TO 3600 m2 

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the building including base-
ments and podiums (open as well as 
closed) as per  Section 3.5. 

ii.  Auxiliary rooms and various areas of 

the building shall be protected as 
per Table 9.30. 

iii. The dry riser + hose reel system shall 
be provided throughout the building 
as per Section 3.2. and Section 3.3. 
iv. Dry risers shall be interconnected at 

the highest level. 

 
 
3.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA 

IS MORE THAN 3600  m2 

i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the building including base-
ments and podiums (open as well as 
closed) as per  Section 3.5. 

ii.  A wet riser System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Sec-
tion 3.4. 

iii. Wet risers shall be interconnected at 

the highest level. 

iv. Auxiliary rooms and various areas of 

the building shall be protected as 
per  Table 9.30. 

minutes of operation, complete with 
low water level detection, dedicated 
direct breeching inlet for refilling  and 
instantaneous refilling arrangement for 
utility water supply. 

 
 
2.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA IS 

901  m2 TO 3600 m2 

 
v.  The capacity of the fire pump set shall 
be 300 gpm at pressure as required to 
satisfy 4.5 bar at the most remote Hose 
reel. 

vi.  Water tank shall have capacity of 45 
minutes of operation, complete with 
low water level detection, dedicated 
direct breeching inlet for refilling and 
instantaneous refilling arrangement for 
utility water supply. 

 
 
 
 
3.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA IS 

MORE THAN 3600  m2 

 
v.  Capacity of the fire pump set shall be 

750 gpm if there are 2 standpipes, 1000 
gpm if there are more than 2 standpipes 
at pressure as required to satisfy 6.9 bar 
at the most remote Landing valve. 

vi.  Water tank shall have capacity of 45 
minutes of operation, complete with 
low water level detection, dedicated 
direct breeching inlet for refilling and 
instantaneous refilling arrangement for 
utility water supply. 

 
 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 701 of 1348 

Table 9.20.b. : Midrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

PRE         
DOMINANT          
OCCUPANCY 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

4.  IF PLOT AREA IS MORE THAN        

20,000 m2   

 
vi.    Where a fire pump set is combined 

and serves yard hydrants and internal 
building systems, the combined fire 
pump capacity shall be 1000 gpm.  
vii.   Where fire pumpset independently 
serves only the yard fire hydrants, 
pump capacity shall be 1000 gpm. 

viii.   Fire water tank shall have capacity of 

60 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, dedi-
cated direct breeching inlet and in-
stantaneous refilling arrangement.  

4.  IF PLOT AREA IS MORE THAN 

20,000  m2   

 
i.  Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided 

as per Section 3.11. 

ii.  Yard hydrants shall not be required 
where infrastructure yard hydrants 
are available within 60 m of such 
building. In this scenario, require-
ments of Table 9.20.b.3. shall apply. 
iii. Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the building including base-
ments and podiums (open as well as 
closed) as per  Section 3.5. in ac-
cordance with Table 9.20.b.1., 2., or 
3., as applicable. 

iv. A wet riser System or hose reel sys-
tem shall be provided throughout 
the building in accordance with Ta-
ble 9.20.b.1., 2., or 3., as applicable. 
v.  Auxiliary rooms and various areas of 

the building shall be protected as 
per  Table 9.30. 

A.    RESIDENTIAL 
GROUP A, B, 
C.  

 
(APARTMENTS, 
LABOR ACCOM-
MODATION, 
STAFF                 
ACCOMMODA-
TION,                    
HOSTEL ) 
 
B.   HEALTHCARE 
GROUP B, C.  

 
C.   MERCANTILE 

GROUP C 
(KIOSKS) 

 
D.   BUSINESS      
GROUP A, B, 
C.  

 
E.   ANIMAL 

HOUSING 
GROUP A, B, 
C.  

 

 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 702 of 1348 

4.4.  Midrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

 
4.4.3.  Midrise buildings having a building height from more than 15 m to less than 23 m 

and having a single exit stair and built-up ground floor area of up to 500 m2 shall be 
provided with Fire protection Systems in compliance with Table 9.20.c., and Auxil-
iary Rooms Fire Protection Systems as per Table 9.30. 

Table 9.20.c.: Midrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

1. IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA 
IS UPTO 500 M2 AND A SINGLE EXIT 
STAIR 

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-
out the building including basements 
and podiums (open as well as closed) 
as per  Section 3.5. 

ii.  A wet riser System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Sec-
tion 3.4. 

iii. Wet risers shall be interconnected at 

the highest level. 

iv. Auxiliary rooms and various areas of 

the building shall be protected as per  
Table 9.30. 

  

 
(APARTMENTS, LA-
BOR ACCOMMODA-
TION, STAFF                 
ACCOMMODATION,                    
HOSTEL ) 
 
HAVING GROUND 
FLOOR BUILT-UP   
AREA OF UPTO      
500 m2 AND A SINGLE   
EXIT STAIR 
 
B.   BUSINESS      

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET 
AND FIRE WATER TANK                    
CAPACITIES 

1. IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA 

IS UPTO 500 M2 AND A SINGLE 
EXIT STAIR 

 
v.  Capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be 500 gpm at pressure as required 
to satisfy 6.9 bar at the most re-
mote Landing valve. 

vi.  Water tank shall have capacity of 
45 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, 
dedicated direct breeching inlet for 
refilling and instantaneous refilling 
arrangement for utility water sup-
ply. 

 
 

PREDOMINANT 
OCCUPANCY 

A.    RESIDENTIAL 

GROUP A, B, C.  

GROUP A, B, C.  

 
HAVING GROUND 
FLOOR BUILT-UP   
AREA OF UPTO      
500 m2 AND A SINGLE   
EXIT STAIR 
 
C.  ANIMAL HOUS-

ING GROUP A, B, 
C.  

 
HAVING GROUND 
FLOOR BUILT-UP   
AREA OF UPTO 500 
m2 AND A SINGLE   
EXIT STAIR 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 703 of 1348 

4.4.  Midrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

 
4.4.4.  Midrise buildings (Detention and Correctional, Prisons) having a building height 

from more than 15 m to less than 23 m shall be provided with Fire protection Sys-
tems in compliance with Table 9.20.d., and Auxiliary Rooms Fire Protection Sys-
tems as per Table 9.30. 

 
 

Table 9.20.d.: Midrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

PREDOMINANT 
OCCUPANCY 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

A.    DETENTION AND 

CORRECTIONAL 
GROUP A, B, C.  

1. FOR CELLS AND INMATES AREAS 
 
i.  Pre-action type Sprinklers shall be 

provided throughout as per Section 
3.7. 

 
2. FOR AREAS OTHER THAN CELLS AND 

INMATES AREAS 

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-
out the building including basements 
and podiums (open as well as closed) 
as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  Auxiliary rooms and various areas of 

the building shall be protected as per         
Table 9.30. 

iii. A wet riser System shall be provided 
throughout the building as per             
Section 3.4. 

iv. The wet risers shall be interconnect-

ed at the highest level. 

v.  Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided 

as per Section 3.11. 

vi. Yard hydrants shall not be required 
where infrastructure yard hydrants 
are available within 60 m of such 
towers. Tapping from existing yard 
hydrant network shall be permitted 
to extend the yard hydrants to com-
ply with coverage requirements. 

 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET 
AND FIRE WATER TANK                    
CAPACITIES 

vii.  Where a fire pump set is com-

bined and serves yard hydrants 
and internal building systems, 
the capacity of the fire pump set 
shall  be 1000 gpm (irrespective 
of number of standpipes) at a 
pressure as required to satisfy 
6.9 bar at the most remote land-
ing valve and the hydrant. 

viii.  Where a fire pump set serves 

yard hydrants and internal build-
ing systems, the combined water 
tank shall have a capacity of  60 
minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, 
dedicated direct breeching inlet 
for refilling and  instantaneous 
refilling arrangement for utility 
water supply. 

ix.  Where a fire pump set serves 
only internal building systems, 
the capacity of the fire pump set 
shall be 750 gpm if building  has 2 
standpipes and 1000 gpm if  t h e  
building has more than 2  stand-
pipes. Pressure shall be as re-
quired to satisfy 6.9 bar at the 
most  remote landing valve. 

x.  Where a fire pump set serves 
only internal building systems, 
the water tank shall have a ca-
pacity of 60 minutes of opera-
tion, complete with low  water 
level detection, dedicated direct 
breeching inlet fo r refilling 
and instantaneous refilling  ar-
rangement for utility water sup-
ply.  

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 704 of 1348 

4.5.  Lowrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

 
4.5.1. 

Lowrise buildings having building height of up to 15 m and low depth underground 
buildings or basements shall be provided with Fire protection Systems in compli-
ance with Table 9.21.a. and Auxiliary Rooms Fire Protection Systems as per Table 
9.30. 

Table 9.21.a: Lowrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

PREDOMINANT 
OCCUPANCY 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

A.  ASSEMBLY  

GROUP A, B, C.  

 
B.  EDUCATION  

GROUP A, B, C.  

 
C.  HEALTHCARE  

GROUP A,  

 
D.  MERCANTILE        

GROUP A, B 

 
E.  HOTEL           

GROUP A, B, C.  

 
F.  DAY CARE GROUP 

A, B, C.  

 
G.   DETENTION AND 
CORRECTIONAL 
GROUP A, B, C.  

 
H.  MIXED AND   

MULTIPLE          
OCCUPANCIES  

 
I.   LOW DEPTH      

UNDERGROUND 
BUILDINGS  OR         
BUILDINGS WITH  
2 OR LESS       
BASEMENTS 

 

quired. 

 
 
3.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR    
AREA IS MORE THAN 3600 m2 

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided 

1.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR    

AREA IS UP TO 500 m2 

 
i.  Hose Reel System shall be provid-
ed throughout the building as per  
Section 3.3. 

ii.  Dry landing valves shall not be re-

quired. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR    

AREA IS 501  m2 TO 3600 m2 

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided 

throughout the building including 
basements and podiums (open as 
well as closed) as per  Section 3.5. 
ii.  Auxiliary rooms and various areas 
of the building shall be protected 
as per Table 9.30. 

iii. Hose reel system shall be provided 

throughout the building as per 
Section 3.3. 

iv. Dry landing valves shall not be re-

throughout the building including 
basements and podiums (open as 
well as closed) as per Section 3.5. 
ii.  Auxiliary rooms and various areas 
of the building shall be protected 
as per Table 9.30. 

iii. Wet riser System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per              
Section 3.4. 

iv. Wet risers shall be interconnected 

at the highest level. 

1.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA 

IS UP TO 500  m2 

 
iii.  The capacity of the fire pump set 
shall be 50 gpm at pressure as re-
quired to satisfy 4.5 bar at the most 
remote Hose reel outlet valve.. 

iv.  The water tank shall have capacity of 

30 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection and 
instantaneous refilling arrangement 
for utility water supply. 

v.  Fire Pump and/or Fire water tank 

shall be permitted to be installed on 
the roof, if existing structure is capa-
ble of accommodating such addition-
al load. 

 
2.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA 

IS 501  m2 TO 3600 m2 

 
v. The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be 300 gpm at pressure as required 
to satisfy 4.5 bar at the most remote 
Hose reel outlet valve.. 

vi.  The water tank shall have capacity of 

30 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection and 
instantaneous refilling arrangement 
for utility water supply. 

 
 
 
3.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA 

IS MORE THAN 3600 m2 

 
v.   The capacity of the fire pump set 

shall be 750 gpm if there are 2 stand-
pipes and 1000 gpm if there are 
more than 2 standpipes at pressure 
as required to satisfy 6.9 bar at the 
most remote Landing Valve. 

vi. The water tank shall have capacity of 

30 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, dedi-
cated direct breeching inlet for refill-
ing and instantaneous refilling ar-
rangement for utility water supply. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 705 of 1348 

4.5.  Lowrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

 
4.5.1. 

Lowrise buildings having building height of up to 15 m and low depth underground 
buildings or basements shall be provided with Fire protection Systems in compli-
ance with Table 9.21.a. and Auxiliary Rooms Fire Protection Systems as per Table 
9.30. 

Table 9.21.a: Lowrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK       CAPACI-
TIES 

4.  IF PLOT AREA IS MORE THAN   

20,000  m2   

 
v.     Where a fire pump set is combined 
and serves yard hydrants and inter-
nal building systems, the capacity of 
the fire pump set shall be 1000 gpm 
irrespective of number of stand-
pipes at pressure as required to 
satisfy 6.9 bar at the most remote 
landing valve and hydrant valve. 
vi.    Where fire pump set is combined 

and serves yard hydrants and inter-
nal fire systems, the combined wa-
ter tank shall have a capacity of 60 
minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, 
dedicated direct breeching inlet 
and instantaneous refilling arrange-
ment.  

PREDOMINANT 
OCCUPANCY 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

A.  ASSEMBLY  

GROUP A, B, C.  

 
B.  EDUCATION  

GROUP A, B, C.  

 
C.  HEALTHCARE  

GROUP A,  

 
D.  MERCANTILE        

GROUP A, B 

 
E.  HOTEL           

4.  IF PLOT AREA IS MORE THAN 

20,000  m2   

 
i.  Sprinklers, hose reels or and wet 

risers shall be provided throughout 
the building including basements 
and podiums (open as well as 
closed) in accordance with Table 
9.21.a. 1., 2., or 3., as applicable. 
ii.  Auxiliary rooms and various areas 
of the building shall be protected 
as per Table 9.30. 

iii. Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provid-

GROUP A, B, C.  

ed as per Section 3.11. 

iv. Yard hydrants shall not be re-

quired where infrastructure yard 
hydrants are available within 60 m 
of such building. Tapping from ex-
isting yard hydrant network shall 
be permitted to extend the yard 
hydrants to comply with coverage 
requirements. In this scenario, re-
quirements of Table 9.21.a.4.i. 
shall apply. 

 
F.  DAY CARE GROUP 

A, B, C.  

 
G.  MIXED AND   

MULTIPLE          
OCCUPANCIES  

 
H.  LOW DEPTH      

UNDERGROUND 
BUILDINGS  OR         
 
 
BUILDINGS WITH  
 
2 OR LESS       
BASEMENTS 
 

 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 706 of 1348 

4.5.  Lowrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

 
4.5.2. 

Lowrise buildings having building height of up to 15 m and low depth underground 
buildings or basements shall be provided with Fire protection Systems in compli-
ance with Table 9.21.b. and Auxiliary Rooms Fire Protection Systems as per Table 
9.30. 

Table 9.21.b.: Lowrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

PREDOMINANT 
OCCUPANCY 

A.    RESIDENTIAL 

GROUP A, B, C.  

 
(APARTMENTS,     
LABOR ACCOMMO-
DATION, STAFF                 
ACCOMMODATION,                    
HOSTEL) 
 
B.   HEALTHCARE 
GROUP B, C.  

 
C.   BUSINESS      

GROUP A, B, C.  

 
D.   ANIMAL       

HOUSING GROUP 
A, B, C.  

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

1.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR  

AREA IS UP TO 3600 m2 

 
i.  Hose Reel System shall be provid-
ed throughout the building as per  
Section 3.3. 

ii.  Dry landing valves shall not be 

required. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR  
AREA IS MORE THAN 3600 m2 

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

1.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA IS 

UP TO 3600 m2 

 
iii.  The capacity of the fire pump set 
shall be 50 gpm at pressure as re-
quired to satisfy 4.5 bar at the most 
remote Hose reel outlet valve.. 

iv.  The water tank shall have capacity of 

30 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection and 
instantaneous refilling arrangement 
for utility water supply. 

v.  Fire Pump and/or Fire water tank 

shall be permitted to be installed on 
the roof, if existing structure is capa-
ble of accommodating such additional 
load. 

 
2.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA IS 

MORE THAN 3600 m2 

 
v.   The capacity of the fire pump set 

shall be 750 gpm if there are 2 stand-
pipes and 1000 gpm if there are more 
than 2 standpipes at pressure as re-
quired to satisfy 6.9 bar at the most 
remote Landing Valve. 

vi. The water tank shall have capacity of 

30 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, dedi-
cated direct breeching inlet for refill-
ing and instantaneous refilling ar-
rangement for utility water supply. 

throughout the building including 
basements and podiums (open as 
well as closed) as per Section 3.5. 
ii.  Auxiliary rooms and various areas 
of the building shall be protected 
as per Table 9.30. 

iii. Wet riser System shall be provid-

ed throughout the building as per              
Section 3.4. 

iv. Wet risers shall be interconnected 

at the highest level. 

 
 
 

 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 707 of 1348 
(APARTMENTS,     
LABOR ACCOMMO-
DATION, STAFF                 
ACCOMMODATION,                    
HOSTEL ) 
 
B.   HEALTHCARE 
GROUP B, C.  

 
i.  Sprinklers, hose reels or and wet 
risers shall be provided through-
out the building including base-
ments and podiums (open as well 
as closed) in accordance with Ta-
ble 9.21.a. 1., 2., or 3., as applica-
ble. 

ii.  Auxiliary rooms and various areas 
of the building shall be protected 
as per Table 9.30. 

iii. Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provid-

ed as per Section 3.11. 

iv. Yard hydrants shall not be re-

quired where infrastructure yard 
hydrants are available within 60 m 
of such building. Tapping from 
existing yard hydrant network 
shall be permitted to extend the 
yard hydrants to comply with cov-
erage requirements. In this sce-
nario, requirements of Table 
9.21.b.3.i shall apply. 

 
 

 
vii.   Where a fire pump set is combined 
and serves yard hydrants and inter-
nal building systems, the capacity of 
the fire pump set shall be 1000 gpm 
irrespective of number of stand-
pipes at pressure as required to 
satisfy 6.9 bar at the most remote 
landing valve and hydrant valve. 

viii.   Where fire pump set is combined 

and serves yard hydrants and inter-
nal fire systems, the combined wa-
ter tank shall have a capacity of 60 
minutes of operation, complete with 
low water level detection, dedicated 
direct breeching inlet for refilling 
and instantaneous refilling arrange-
ment for utility water supply.  

 

4.5.  Lowrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

 
4.5.2. 

PREDOMINANT 
OCCUPANCY 

A.    RESIDENTIAL 

GROUP A, B, C.  

Lowrise buildings having building height of up to 15 m and low depth underground 
buildings or basements shall be provided with Fire protection Systems in compli-
ance with Table 9.21.b. and Auxiliary Rooms Fire Protection Systems as per Table 
9.30. 

Table 9.21.b.: Lowrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

3.  IF PLOT AREA IS MORE THAN 

20,000  m2   

3.  IF PLOT AREA IS MORE THAN    

20,000  m2   

 
C.   BUSINESS      

GROUP A, B, C.  

 
D.   ANIMAL       

HOUSING GROUP 
A, B, C.  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 708 of 1348 

4.5.  Lowrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

 
4.5.3. 

Lowrise buildings having building height of up to 15 m and low depth underground 
buildings or basements but single exit stair shall be provided with Fire protection 
Systems in compliance with Table 9.21.c. and Auxiliary Rooms Fire Protection Sys-
tems as per Table 9.30. 

Table 9.21.c.: Lowrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

1.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR  

AREA IS UP TO 500 m2 

 
i.  Hose Reel System shall be provid-
ed throughout the building as per 
Section 3.3. 

ii.  Dry landing valves shall not be 

required. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR  
AREA IS MORE THAN 500 m2 

 
 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided 

throughout the building including 
basements and podiums (open as 
well as closed) as per Section 3.5. 
ii.  Auxiliary rooms and various areas 
of the building shall be protected 
as per Table 9.30. 

iii. Hose Reel System shall be provid-
ed throughout the building as per 
Section 3.3. 

iv. Dry landing valves shall not be 

required. 

PREDOMINANT 
OCCUPANCY 

A. RESIDENTIAL 

GROUP A 

     (APARTMENTS) 
     
WITH SINGLE EXIT 
STAIR COMPLYING 
TO CHAPTER 3,                          
Table 3.24.2.1. 
 
 
B. BUSINESS              

GROUP A, B, C 

      
WITH SINGLE EXIT 
STAIR COMPLYING 
TO CHAPTER 3,                          
Table 3.19. 2.  
 
C.  MERCANTILE        

GROUP A, B 

 
WITH SINGLE EXIT 
STAIR COMPLYING 
TO CHAPTER 3,                          
Table 3.32.5. 
 
 
D.  HOTEL           

 
 
 
 
 

GROUP A, B, C.  

 
WITH SINGLE EXIT 
STAIR 
 

 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

1.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR  AREA 

IS UP TO 500 m2 

 
iii. Capacity of the fire pump set shall be 

50 gpm at pressure as required to 
satisfy 4.5 bar at the most remote 
Hose Outlet. 

iv. Water tank shall have capacity of 30 
minutes of operation, complete with 
low water level detection, dedicated 
direct breeching inlet for refilling and 
instantaneous refilling arrangement 
for utility water supply. 

v.  Fire Pump and/or Fire water tank 

shall be permitted to be installed on 
the roof, if existing structure is capa-
ble of accommodating such additional 
load. 

 
2.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR  AREA 

IS MORE THAN 500 m2 

 
 
v. Capacity of the fire pump set shall be 

300 gpm at pressure as required to 
satisfy 4.5 bar at the most remote 
Hose Outlet. 

vi. Water tank shall have capacity of 30 
minutes of operation, complete with 
low water level detection, dedicated 
direct breeching inlet for refilling and 
instantaneous refilling arrangement 
for utility water supply. 

vii. Fire Pump and/or Fire water tank 

shall be permitted to be installed on 
the roof, if existing structure is capa-
ble of accommodating such additional 
load. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 709 of 1348 

4.5.  Lowrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

 
4.5.4. 

Lowrise existing villas converted to commercial outlets shall be provided with Fire 
protection Systems in compliance with Table 9.21.d. and Auxiliary Rooms Fire Pro-
tection Systems as per Table 9.30. 

Table 9.21.d.: Lowrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

1.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR    

AREA IS LESS THAN 900 M2             
IRRESPECTIVE OF NUMBER OF 
STAIRS 

 
i.  Fire Extinguishers as per Chapter 

4. 

 
 
2.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AR-

EA IS MORE THAN 900 M2  BUT 
TWO EXIT STAIRS ARE AVAILABLE 

 
i.  Fire Extinguishers as per Chapter 

4. 

 
 
 
3.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR    

AREA IS MORE THAN 900 M2  AND 
SECOND EXIT STAIR IS NOT  
AVAILABLE 

 
i.  It is highly recommended to the 
owner to consider providing se-
cond exit stair externally from first 
floor.                                                 
OR  

ii.  It is highly recommended to con-

sider providing automatic sprinkler 
system  throughout the building 
including basements as per Sec-
tion 3.5. and Hose Reel System as 
per Section 3.3. 

1.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA IS 
LESS THAN 900 M2                                   
IRRESPECTIVE OF NUMBER OF STAIRS 

 
NA 
 
 
 
2.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA IS 

MORE THAN 900 M2  BUT TWO EXIT 
STAIRS ARE AVAILABLE 

 
NA 
 
 
 
3.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA IS 

MORE THAN 900 M2  AND SECOND EXIT 
STAIR IS NOT AVAILABLE 

 
iii.   Where automatic sprinkler system is 

considered, the capacity of the fire 
pump set shall be 250 gpm with pres-
sure of 4.5 bar available at most remote 
hose reel outlet. 

iv.   The water tank shall have capacity of 30 

minutes of operation, complete with 
low water level detection and instanta-
neous refilling arrangement. 

v.    Fire Pump and/or Fire water tank shall 

be permitted to be installed on the roof, 
if existing structure is capable of accom-
modating such additional load. 

PREDOMINANT 
OCCUPANCY 

A.  EXISTING       

VILLAS (G+1)        

 
CONVERTED TO 
NURSERIES,  
CLINICS, 
DAY CARE       
CENTERS, 
RESTAURANTS, 
SHOW ROOMS, 
BOUTIQUES OR 
SUCH               
COMMERCIAL 
OUTLETS 
 

 
 
 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 710 of 1348 

4.5.  Lowrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

 
4.5.5. 

Lowrise villas, business and mosques having commercial and mercantile outlets 
attached to it or in the same plot shall be provided with Fire protection Systems in 
compliance with Table 9.21.e. and Auxiliary Rooms Fire Protection Systems as per 
Table 9.30. 

Table 9.21.e.: Lowrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

PREDOMINANT 
OCCUPANCY 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

1.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR    AREA OF 

THE COMMERCIAL    OUTLET IS UPTO 
900 M2              

 
iv. Capacity of the fire pump set shall be 50 
gpm at pressure as required to satisfy 4.5 
bar at the most remote Hose Outlet. 
v. Water tank shall have capacity of 30 

minutes of operation, complete with low 
water level detection, dedicated direct 
breeching inlet for refilling and instanta-
neous refilling arrangement for utility 
water supply. 

vi. Fire Pump and/or Fire water tank shall 

be permitted to be installed on the roof, 
if  structure is capable of accommodating 
such additional load. 

 
 
2. 

IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA OF 
THE COMMERCIAL OUTLET IS MORE 
THAN 900 M2   

 
vi. Capacity of the fire pump set shall be 300 
gpm at pressure as required to satisfy 4.5 
bar at the most remote Hose Outlet. 
vi. Water tank shall have capacity of 30 

minutes of operation, complete with low 
water level detection, dedicated direct 
breeching inlet for refilling and instanta-
neous refilling arrangement for utility 
water supply. 

vii. Fire Pump and/or Fire water tank shall 

be permitted to be installed on the roof, 
if structure is capable of accommodating 
such additional load. 

1.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR    
AREA OF THE COMMERCIAL    
OUTLET IS UPTO 900 M2              

 
i.  Hose Reel System shall be provid-
ed throughout the building as per 
Section 3.3. 

ii.  Dry landing valves shall not be re-

quired. 

iii. Hose reels or dry landing valves 
shall not be required if the infra-
structure yard hydrants are availa-
ble and cover the commercial out-
let. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
2.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR    
AREA OF THE COMMERCIAL    
OUTLET IS MORE THAN 900 M2   

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided 

throughout the building including 
basements as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  Auxiliary rooms and various areas 
of the building shall be protected 
as per Table 9.30. 

iii. Hose Reel System shall be provid-
ed throughout the building as per 
Section 3.3. 

iv. Dry landing valves shall not be re-

quired. 

v.  Hose reels or dry landing valves 
shall not be required if the infra-
structure yard hydrants are availa-
ble and cover the commercial out-
let. 

A.  VILLAS (G+1)        
 
HAVING         
COMMERCIAL 
OUTLETS           
ATTACHED TO IT 
OR IN THE SAME 
PLOT 
 
B. BUSINESS 
(GROUP A, B, C)      
 
HAVING         
COMMERCIAL 
OUTLETS          
ATTACHED TO IT 
OR IN THE SAME 
PLOT 
 
C. MOSQUES        
 
HAVING         
COMMERCIAL 
OUTLETS          
ATTACHED TO IT 
OR IN THE SAME 
PLOT 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 711 of 1348 

4.5.  Lowrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

 
4.5.6. 

Tents, marquees, site offices, site dwellings shall be provided with Fire protection 
Systems in compliance with Table 9.21.f. and Auxiliary Rooms Fire Protection Sys-
tems as per Table 9.30. 

PREDOMINANT 
OCCUPANCY 

A.  TEMPORARY 
TENTS AND 
MARQUEES 

B.   PARMANENT 

TENTS AND 
MARQUEES 

C.   PARMANENT 
COMMERCIAL 
TENTS AND 
DESERT 
CAMPS 

D.  SITE OFFICES 
      (REQUIRED 

FOR LESS 
THAN 6 
MONTHS) 

E.  SITE OFFICES 
      (REQUIRED 
FOR MORE 
THAN 6 
MONTHS) 

Table 9.21.f.: Lowrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

i.  Fire Extinguishers as per                       

NA 

Chapter 4. 

i.  Hose Reel System shall be provid-
ed throughout the building as per 
Section 3.3. 

ii.  Dry landing valves shall not be re-

quired. 

ii.   The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be 50 gpm with pressure of 4.5 bar 
available at most remote hose reel out-
let. 

iii.  The water tank shall have capacity of 30 
minutes of operation, complete with low 
water level detection and instantaneous 
refilling arrangement. 

i.  Hose Reel System shall be provid-
ed throughout the building as per 
Section 3.3. 

ii.  Dry landing valves shall not be re-

quired. 

ii.   The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be 50 gpm with pressure of 4.5 bar 
available at most remote hose reel out-
let. 

iii.  The water tank shall have capacity of 30 

minutes of operation, complete with 
low water level detection and instanta-
neous refilling arrangement. 

i.  Fire Extinguishers as per                       
 

Chapter 4. 

i.  Hose Reel System shall be provid-
ed throughout the building as per 
Section 3.3. 

ii.  Dry landing valves shall not be re-

quired. 

ii.   The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be 50 gpm with pressure of 4.5 bar 
available at most remote hose reel out-
let. 

iii.  The water tank shall have capacity of 30 

minutes of operation, complete with 
low water level detection and instanta-
neous refilling arrangement. 

i.  Fire Extinguishers as per                       
 

Chapter 4. 

F.   DETACHED 
G+1 BUILD-
INGS HAVING 
GROUND 
FLOOR BUILT 
UP AREA OF 
UPTO 150 SQ 
M, OF ANY            
OCCUPANCY 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 712 of 1348 

4.6.  Mall Fire Protection Systems 

 
4.6.1.  Malls (Covered, Open and Mixed) shall be provided with Fire protection Systems in 

compliance with Table 9.22. and Auxiliary Rooms Fire Protection Systems as per 
Table 9.30. 

 

Table 9.22.: Mall Fire Protection Systems 

PRE       
DOMINANT       
OCCUPANCY 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

A.  COVERED 

MALL  

1.  IRRESPECTIVE OF AREA OR FLOORS 
 
i. 

Sprinklers shall be provided throughout 
the building including basements and 
podiums (open as well as closed) as per             
Section 3.5. 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

1.   IRRESPECTIVE OF AREA OR FLOORS 
 

x.   Where a fire pump set is com-

bined and serves yard hydrants 
and internal building systems, 
the capacity of the fire pump set 
shall  be 2000 gpm (irrespective 
of number of standpipes) at a 
pressure as required to satisfy 
6.9 bar at the most remote 
landing valve. 

xi.    Where a fire pump set serves 

yard hydrants and internal 
building systems, the combined 
water tank shall have a capacity 
of  60 minutes of operation, 
complete with low water level 
detection and  instantaneous 
refilling arrangement. 

xii.   Where a fire pump set serves 
only internal building systems, 
the capacity of the fire pump set 
shall be 1500 gpm (irrespective 
of number of standpipes) at a 
pressure as required to satisfy 
6.9 bar at the most remote 
landing valve. 

xiii.  Where a fire pump set serves only 
internal building systems, the wa-
ter tank shall have a capacity of 
60 minutes of operation, com-
plete with low  water level detec-
tion, dedicated direct breeching 
inlet and instantaneous refilling 
arrangement. 

xiv.  Multiple breeching inlets shall be 

provided across the mall and 
along the fire access road. 

ii.  Auxiliary rooms and various areas of the 

building shall be protected as per         
Table 9.30. 

iii.  A wet riser System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per                
Section 3.4. 

iv.  Wet risers shall be interconnected at 

v. 

the highest level. 
Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided as 
per Section 3.11. 

vi.  Yard hydrants shall not be required 

where infrastructure yard hydrants are 
available within 120 m of every exterior 
part of the mall. Tapping from existing 
yard hydrant network shall be per-
mitted to extend the yard hydrants to 
comply with coverage requirements. In 
this scenario, requirements of Table 
9.22.1.xii. and xiii shall apply. 

vii.  A minimum of 2 breeching inlets shall 
be provided at two separate locations 
along the fire access road. 

viii.  Every tenant space shall be provided 
with an isolation valve to enable the 
isolation of the tenant areas from rest 
of the Mall , during repairs, renovation 
or maintenance. 

ix.  Supermarket storage areas, Hypermar-

ket storage areas, large clothing storage 
areas and such storage hazards shall be 
provided with ESFR sprinklers as per 
relevant codes of this chapter. 

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 713 of 1348 

4.6.  Mall Fire Protection Systems 

Table 9.22.: Mall Fire Protection Systems 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

PRE       
DOMINANT       
OCCUPAN-
CY 

B. OPEN MALL 
 
THE               
REQUIREMENT 
IS ONLY FOR 
OPEN            
CIRCULATION 
AREA AND 
NOT FOR TEN-
ANT SPACES.      
TENANT     
SPACES SHALL 
COMPLY WITH 
OTHER          
APPLICABLE 
SECTIONS AS 
PER               
OCCUPANCY 
TYPES 
 
COMBINED 
FIRE PUMP SET 
AND FIRE    
WATER TANK 
FOR BOTH 
OPEN MALL   
CIRCULATION 
AREA AND THE 
TENANT   
BUILDING    
INTERNAL FIRE 
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM SHALL 
BE PERMITTED 

1.  IF TOTAL PLOT AREA IS UP TO 900 M2 
 
i.  Hose Reel System, exterior type, shall 

be provided throughout the open circu-
lation area, along the fire access road, 
as per Section 3.3. 

ii.  Dry landing valves and risers shall not 

be required. 

 
 
 
 
2.  IF TOTAL PLOT AREA IS MORE THAN 

900 M2  UPTO 2000 M2 

 
i.  Exterior Wet riser System shall be pro-
vided throughout the open circulation 
area, along the fire access road and 
such that all tenant buildings are within 
30 m of the hose outlet, as per Section 
3.4. 

ii.  Dry landing valves and risers shall not 

be required. 

iii. Minimum of 2 breeching inlets shall be 

provided at two separate locations 
along the fire access road. 

OR 
i.  Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided as 

per Table 9.22.B.3.  

ii.  Wet risers shall not be required. 
iii. Yard hydrants, wet risers or hose reel 
system shall not be required where in-
frastructure yard hydrants are available 
within 120 m of every exterior part of 
the tenant buildings. Tapping from ex-
isting yard hydrant network shall be 
permitted to extend the yard hydrants 
to comply with coverage requirements.  

 
3.  IF PLOT AREA IS MORE THAN 2000 M2   
 
i.  Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided as 

per Section 3.11. 

ii.  Yard hydrants or wet risers shall not be 
required where infrastructure yard hy-
drants are available within 120 m of 
every exterior part of the tenant build-
ings. 

iii. Minimum of 2 breeching inlets shall be 

provided at two separate locations 
along the fire access road. 

iv. Wet risers and dry landing valves shall 

 

not be required. 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

1.  IF TOTAL PLOT AREA IS UP TO 900 M2 
 
iii.  The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be 50 gpm at a pressure as required 
to satisfy 4.5 bar at the most remote 
Hose reel outlet valve.. 

iv.  The water tank shall have capacity of 

30 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection and 
instantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 
2.  IF TOTAL PLOT AREA IS MORE THAN 

900 M2  UPTO 2000 M2 

 

iv.  The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be 750 gpm at a pressure as required 
to satisfy 6.9 bar at the most remote 
landing valve. 

v.  The water tank shall have capacity of 

60 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, dedi-
cated direct breeching inlet  and in-
stantaneous refilling arrangement. 
vi.  Where yard hydrant is considered, 

the capacity of the fire pump set shall 
be 1000 gpm at a pressure as required 
to satisfy 6.9 bar at the most remote 
hydrant outlet. 

vii. The water tank shall have capacity of 

60 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, dedi-
cated direct breeching inlet  and in-
stantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 
 
 
 
3.  IF PLOT AREA IS MORE THAN           

2000 M2   

 
v.  The capacity of the fire pump set shall 
be 1000 gpm at a pressure as required 
to satisfy 6.9 bar at the most remote 
landing valve. 

vi.  The water tank shall have capacity of 

60 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, dedi-
cated direct breeching inlet  and in-
stantaneous refilling arrangement. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 714 of 1348 

4.6.  Mall Fire Protection Systems 

 
 
 

PREDOMI-
NANT       
OCCUPANCY 

C. MIXED MALL 
 
(MERCANTILE 
DEVLEOP-
MENTS WHERE 
COVERED MALL 
AND OPEN 
MALL ARE 
MIXED AND 
INTERMINGLE) 

 

Table 9.22.: Mall Fire Protection Systems 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

1.  IRRESPECTIVE OF AREA OR FLOORS 
 
i. 

Sprinklers shall be provided through-
out the enclosed buildings, retails, 
restaurants and service blocks includ-
ing basements and podiums (open as 
well as closed) as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  Auxiliary rooms and various areas of 

the building shall be protected as per         
Table 9.30. 

iii.  A wet riser System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per                
Section 3.4. 

iv.  Wet risers shall be interconnected at 

v. 

the highest level. 
Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided 
as per Section 3.11. 

vi.  Yard hydrants shall not be required 
where infrastructure yard hydrants 
are available within 120 m of every 
exterior part of the mall. Tapping 
from existing yard hydrant network 
shall be permitted to extend the yard 
hydrants to comply with coverage 
requirements. In this scenario, re-
quirements of Table 9.22.3.xii. and 
xiii shall apply. 

vii.  A minimum of 2 breeching inlets shall 
be provided at two separate locations 
along the fire access road. 

viii.  Every tenant space shall be provided 
with an isolation valve to enable the 
isolation of the tenant areas from rest 
of the Mall , during repairs, renova-
tion or maintenance. 

ix.  Enclosed supermarket storage areas, 

Hypermarket storage areas, large 
clothing storage areas and such en-
closed storage hazards shall be pro-
vided with ESFR sprinklers as per rele-
vant codes of this chapter. 

1.   IRRESPECTIVE OF AREA OR FLOORS 
 
x.   Where a fire pump set is combined 
and serves yard hydrants and inter-
nal building systems, the capacity 
of the fire pump set shall  be 2000 
gpm (irrespective of number of 
standpipes) at a pressure as re-
quired to satisfy 6.9 bar at the 
most remote landing valve. 

xi.     Where a fire pump set serves yard 
hydrants and internal building sys-
tems, the combined water tank 
shall have a capacity of  60 minutes 
of operation, complete with low 
water level detection and  instanta-
neous refilling arrangement. 

xii.    Where a fire pump set serves only 

internal building systems, the ca-
pacity of the fire pump set  shall be 
1500 gpm (irrespective of number 
of standpipes) at a pressure as re-
quired to satisfy 6.9 bar at the 
most remote landing valve. 

xiii.   Where a fire pump set serves only 

internal building systems, the water 
tank shall have a capacity of 60 
minutes of operation, complete with 
low  water level detection, dedicated 
direct breeching inlet and instanta-
neous refilling  arrangement. 

xiv.  Multiple breeching inlets shall be 

provided across the mall and along 
the fire access road. 

 
 
 
 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 715 of 1348 

4.7.  Villa Fire Protection Systems 

 
4.7.1. 

Private and Commercial Villas shall be provided with Fire protection Systems in 
compliance with Table 9.23. and Auxiliary Rooms Fire Protection Systems, if any, 
shall be as per Table 9.30. 

Table 9.23.: Private and Commercial Villa Fire Protection Systems 

OCCUPANCY 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

FIRE PUMP AND FIRE WATER 
TANK CAPACITIES 

A. PRIVATE  VILLA  
 
 

1.  Though it is not mandatory, it is highly 

1.a.  Domestic type and residential 

recommended to consider providing 
automatic sprinklers throughout private 
villas irrespective of built-up area. 

type sprinkler systems, with 
domestic water tank are ac-
ceptable. 

1.b.  Fire Pump and/or Fire water 
tank shall be permitted to be 
installed on the roof, if struc-
ture is capable of accommo-
dating such additional load. 

 
 
2.  IF GROUND FLOOR BUILT-UP 

AREA IS MORE THAN 1500 m2   

 
v.  The capacity of the fire pump 

set shall be 250 gpm at pressure 
as required to satisfy 4.5 bar at 
the most remote Hose reel out-
let valve. 

vi. The water tank shall have capac-

ity of 30 minutes of operation, 
complete with low water level 
detection and instantaneous 
refilling arrangement. 

 
 
 
3.  IF BASEMENT FLOOR BUILT-UP 
AREA IS MORE THAN 1500 m2 

 

v.  The capacity of the fire pump 

set shall be 250 gpm at pressure 
as required to satisfy 4.5 bar at 
the most remote Hose reel out-
let valve. 

vi. The water tank shall have capac-

ity of 30 minutes of operation, 
complete with low water level 
detection and instantaneous 
refilling arrangement. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.  IF GROUND FLOOR BUILT-UP AREA IS 

MORE THAN 1500 m2   

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided throughout 
the building including basements (open 
as well as closed) as per Section 3.5. 
ii.  Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the basement and ground 
floor as per Section 3.3. 

iii. Dry landing valves and risers shall not be 

required. 

iv. For Commercial developments, Fire 

Pump Room and Fire water tank are de-
veloper’s responsibility and shall be pro-
vided at developer’s facility manage-
ment service block or areas. 

 
3.  IF BASEMENT FLOOR BUILT-UP AREA IS 

MORE THAN 1500 m2   

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided throughout 
the basements (open as well as closed) 
as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the basement and ground 
floor as per Section 3.3. 

iii. Dry landing valves and risers shall not be 

required. 

iv. For Commercial developments, Fire 

Pump Room and Fire water tank are de-
veloper’s responsibility and shall be pro-
vided at developer’s facility manage-
ment service block or areas. 

   

 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 716 of 1348 

4.7.  Villa Fire Protection Systems 

 
4.7.1. 

Private and Commercial Villas shall be provided with Fire protection Systems in 
compliance with Table 9.23. and Auxiliary Rooms, if any, Fire Protection Systems as 
per Table 9.30. 

Table 9.23.: Private and Commercial Villa Fire Protection Systems 

OCCUPANCY  SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

FIRE PUMP AND FIRE WATER 
TANK CAPACITIES 

B. COMMERCIAL 

VILLA 

1.  Though it is not mandatory, it is highly 

1.a.  Domestic type and residential type 

recommended to consider providing 
automatic sprinklers throughout the 
villas irrespective of built-up area.  

 
2.  ALL COMMERCIAL VILLA                            

sprinkler systems shall be per-
mitted. 

 
 
2.  ALL COMMERCIAL VILLA                            

DEVELOPMENTS HAVING PLOT AREA 
OF 20,000 m2  OR MORE 

DEVELOPMENTS HAVING PLOT  AR-
EA OF 20,000 m2  OR MORE 

 
i.  Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided as 

 
ii.   The capacity of the fire pump set 

per Section 3.11. 

 
 

3.  IF GROUND FLOOR BUILT-UP AREA OF 
COMMERCIAL VILLA IS MORE THAN     
1500 m2   

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided throughout 
the building including basements (open 
as well as closed) as per Section 3.5. 
ii.  Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the basement and ground 
floor as per Section 3.3. 

iii. Dry landing valves and risers shall not 

be required. 

iv. For Commercial developments, Fire 
Pump Room and Fire water tank are 
developer’s responsibility and shall be 
provided at developer’s facility manage-
ment service block or areas. 

 
4.  IF BASEMENT FLOOR BUILT-UP AREA IS 

MORE THAN 1500 m2   

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided throughout 
the basements (open as well as closed) 
as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the basement and ground 
floor as per Section 3.3. 

iii. Dry landing valves and risers shall not 

be required. 

iv. For Commercial developments, Fire 
Pump Room and Fire water tank are 
developer’s responsibility and shall be 
provided at developer’s facility manage-
ment service block or areas. 

 

 

shall be 1000 gpm at pressure as re-
quired to satisfy 6.9 bar at the most 
remote hydrant outlet valve. 

iii.  The water tank shall have a capacity 

of 60 minutes of operation, com-
plete with low water level detection, 
dedicated direct breeching inlet  and 
instantaneous refilling arrangement. 

3.  IF GROUND FLOOR BUILT-UP  AREA 

OF COMMERCIAL VILLA IS MORE 
THAN 1500 m2   

 
v.  The capacity of the fire pump set 

shall be 250 gpm at pressure as re-
quired to satisfy 4.5 bar at the most 
remote Hose reel outlet valve. 

vi. The water tank shall have capacity of 

30 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection and 
instantaneous refilling arrangement. 
vii. Where infrastructure yard hydrants 
are provided, the required villa sprin-
kler system shall be permitted to be 
fed by the yard hydrant pumpset and 
water. 

 
4.  IF BASEMENT FLOOR BUILT-UP AR-

EA IS MORE THAN 1500 m2 

 

v.  The capacity of the fire pump set 

shall be 250 gpm at pressure as re-
quired to satisfy 4.5 bar at the most 
remote Hose reel outlet valve. 

vi. The water tank shall have capacity of 

30 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection and 
instantaneous refilling arrangement. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 717 of 1348 

4.8.  Parking Facilities Fire Protection Systems 

 
4.8.1. 

Parking facilities shall be provided with fire protection systems in compliance with 
Table 9.24. and Auxiliary Rooms Fire Protection Systems as per Table 9.30. 

Table 9.24.: Parking Facility Fire Protection Systems 

OCCUPANCY  SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

A.  PARKING 
GROUP A , 
ENCLOSED 
PARKING 
STRUCTURE 

 
 

1.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA IS 

UP TO 900 M2  AND  STRUCTURE 
HEIGHT IS UP TO 15 M (LOWRISE) 

 
 
i.  A dry riser + Hose Reel System shall be 

provided throughout the building as 
per Section 3.2. and Section 3.3. 

ii.  Dry risers shall be interconnected at 

the highest level. 

 
 
 
 
 
2.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA IS 
901 M2  TO 3600 M2  AND  STRUCTURE 
HEIGHT IS UP TO 15 M (LOWRISE) 

FIRE PUMP AND FIRE WATER 
TANK CAPACITIES 

1.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA 
IS UP TO 900 M2 AND STRUCTURE 
HEIGHT IS UP TO 15 M (LOWRISE) 

 
iii.  The capacity of the fire pump set 

shall be 50 gpm at a pressure as re-
quired to satisfy 4.5 bar at the most 
remote Hose reel  outlet valve. 

iv.  The water tank shall have a capacity 

of 30 minutes of operation, com-
plete with low water level detection 
and instantaneous refilling arrange-
ment. 

 
2.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA 
IS 901 M2  TO 3600 M2  AND  STRUC-
TURE HEIGHT IS UP TO 15 M 
(LOWRISE) 

 
v.   The capacity of the fire pump set 
shall be 300 gpm at a pressure as 
required to satisfy 4.5 bar at the 
most remote Hose valve. 

vi.  The water tank shall have a capacity 

of 30 minutes of operation, com-
plete with low water level detection 
and instantaneous refilling arrange-
ment. 

 
 
 
3.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA 
IS MORE THAN 3600 M2  OR STRUC-
TURE HEIGHT EXCEEDS 15 M 
(MIDRISE AND ABOVE) 

 
v.   The capacity of the fire pump set 

shall be 750 gpm if there are 2 stand-
pipes, 1000 gpm if there are more 
than 3 standpipes at a pressure as 
required to satisfy 6.9 bar at the 
most remote landing valve. 

vi.  The water tank shall have capacity 

of 60 minutes of operation, com-
plete with low water level detection 
and instantaneous refilling arrange-
ment. 

 

 

 
 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided throughout 

the parking structure as per Section 
3.5. 

ii.  Auxiliary rooms and various areas of 

the building shall be protected as per         
Table 9.30. 

iii. A dry riser + Hose Reel System shall be 

provided throughout the building as 
per Section 3.2. and Section 3.3. 

iv. Dry risers shall be interconnected at 

the highest level. 

 
3.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA IS 
MORE THAN 3600 M2  OR STRUCTURE 
HEIGHT EXCEEDS 15 M (MIDRISE AND 
ABOVE) 

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided throughout 

the Parking structure as per Section 
3.5. 

ii.  Auxiliary rooms and various areas of 
the building shall be protected as per 
Table 9.30. 

iii. A wet riser System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per              
Section 3.4. 

iv. Wet risers shall be interconnected at 

the highest level. 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 718 of 1348 

 

Table 9.24.: Parking Facility Fire Protection Systems 

PREDOMINANT 
OCCUPANCY 

A.  PARKING 

GROUP A ,   
ENCLOSED 
PARKING 
STRUCTURE 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

4. IF PLOT AREA IS MORE THAN      

20,000  m2   

 
i.  Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided 
as per Section 3.11., in a loop to cov-
er the entire development.  

ii.  Yard hydrants shall not be required 
where infrastructure yard hydrants 
are available within 60 m of every 
exterior part of the structure. Tap-
ping from existing yard hydrant net-
work shall be permitted to extend 
the yard hydrants to comply with 
coverage requirements.  

iii. Sprinklers, wet risers and hose reel 

system shall be provided for the 
building in accordance with Table 
9.24.A.1., 2., or 3. as applicable. 

1.  IRRESPECTIVE OF AREA 
 
i.  A deluge water spray system shall be 

provided as per Section 3.8., such 
that each vehicle is under the deluge 
spray coverage. 

ii.  A wet riser system shall be provided 
throughout the building, near stairs 
and on access walkways as per       
Section 3.4. 

iii. Wet risers shall be interconnected at 

the highest level. 

 
 
2.  IF PLOT AREA IS MORE THAN          

20,000  m2   

 
i.  Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided 
as per Section 3.11., in a loop to cov-
er the entire development. The fire 
Hose for interior of the building shall 
be tapped from the hydrant loop. 

ii.  Yard hydrants shall not be required 
where infrastructure yard hydrants 
are available within 60 m of every 
exterior part of the structure. Tap-
ping from existing yard hydrant net-
work shall be permitted to extend 
the yard hydrants to comply with 
coverage requirements.  

B.  PARKING 

GROUP B ,   
MECHANICAL/ 
ROBOTIC 
PARKING 
STRUCTURE 

 
 

 

FIRE PUMP AND FIRE WATER 
TANK CAPACITIES 

4.  IF PLOT AREA IS MORE THAN        

20,000  m2   

 
iii. Where a fire pump set is combined 

and serves yard hydrants and internal 
building systems, the capacity of the 
fire pump set shall be 1000 gpm at a 
pressure as required to satisfy 6.9 bar 
at the most remote hydrant valve and 
the hose outlet. 

iv. Where fire pumpset serves only the 

yard fire hydrants, pump capacity shall 
be 1000 gpm at a pressure as required 
to satisfy 6.9 bar at the most remote 
hydrant valve. 

v. The combined Fire water tank shall 

have capacity of 60 minutes of opera-
tion, complete with low water level 
detection, dedicated direct breeching 
inlet and instantaneous refilling ar-
rangement.  

1.  IRRESPECTIVE OF AREA 
 
iv. The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be sufficient to satisfy minimum of 2 
adjacent deluge water spray system 
zones at a pressure as required to 
satisfy 6.9 bar at the most remote 
Hose reel outlet valve. 

v.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 

60 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection and 
instantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 
2.  IF PLOT AREA IS MORE THAN                

20,000  m2   

 
iii.  Where a fire pump set is combined 

and serves yard hydrants and internal 
building systems, the capacity of the 
fire pump set shall be 1000 gpm at a 
pressure as required to satisfy 6.9 bar 
at the most remote landing valve and 
the hydrant outlet. 

iv. Where fire pumpset serves only the 

yard fire hydrants, pump capacity shall 
be 1000 gpm at a pressure as required 
to satisfy 6.9 bar at the most remote 
hydrant outlet. 

v. The combined Fire water tank shall 

have capacity of 60 minutes of opera-
tion, complete with low water level 
detection, dedicated direct breeching 
inlet and instantaneous refilling ar-
rangement  

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 719 of 1348Table 9.24.: Parking Facility Fire Protection Systems 

 

 
OCCUPAN-
CY 

C.  PARKING 
GROUP C  
OPEN 
PARKING 
STRUCTURE 

 
i.  Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provid-
ed as per Section 3.11., in a loop 
to cover the entire development.  

ii.  Yard hydrants shall not be re-

quired where infrastructure yard 
hydrants are available within 60 m 
of every exterior part of the struc-
ture. Tapping from existing yard 
hydrant network shall be per-
mitted to extend the yard hydrants 
to comply with coverage require-
ments. 

iii. Sprinklers, wet risers or hose reel 

system shall be in accordance with 
Table 9.24.C.1., 2., or 3., as appli-
cable. 

 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

1.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AR-
EA IS UP TO 2000 m2 AND BUILD-
ING HEIGHT IS LESS THAN 15 M 

 
i.  Hose Reel System shall be provid-
ed throughout the building as per 
Section 3.3. 

ii.  Dry risers shall not be required. 
 
 
 
 
2. IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA 

IS UP TO 2000 m2  AND STRUC-
TURE HEIGHT IS 15 M—UP TO 
LESS THAN 23 M 

 
i.  A wet riser System shall be provid-
ed throughout the building as per 
Section 3.4. 

ii.  Wet risers shall be interconnected 

at the highest level. 

 
 
 
 
 
3. IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA 
IS MORE THAN 2000 m2 OR BUILD-
ING HEIGHT IS 23 m AND ABOVE 

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided 

throughout the Parking structure 
as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  A wet riser system shall be provid-
ed throughout the building as per 
Section 3.4. 

iii. Wet risers shall be interconnected 

at the highest level. 

 
4.  IF PLOT AREA IS MORE THAN 

20,000  m2   

FIRE PUMP AND FIRE WATER TANK    
CAPACITIES 

1.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA IS UP TO 
2000 m2 AND BUILDING HEIGHT IS LESS THAN 
15 M 

 
iii.   The capacity of the fire pump set shall be 50 

gpm at a pressure as required to satisfy 4.5 
bar at the most remote Hose reel outlet valve. 

iv.  The water tank shall have capacity of 45 

minutes of operation, complete with low wa-
ter level detection and instantaneous refilling 
arrangement. 

 
2. IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA IS UP TO 
2000 m2  AND STRUCTURE HEIGHT IS 15 M—
UP TO LESS THAN 23 M 

 
iii.   The capacity of the fire pump set shall be 750 

gpm if there are 2 stairs, 1000 gpm if there 
are 3 stairs and 1000 gpm if there are more 
than 3 stairs at pressure as required to satisfy 
6.9 bar at the most remote landing valve. 

iv.  The water tank shall have capacity of 60 

minutes of operation, complete with low wa-
ter level detection, dedicated direct breech-
ing inlet  and instantaneous refilling arrange-
ment. 

 
3. IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA IS MORE 
THAN 2000 m2 OR BUILDING HEIGHT IS 23 m 
AND ABOVE 

 
iv.   The capacity of the fire pump set shall be 

1000 gpm at a pressure as required to satisfy 
6.9 bar at the most remote Landing Valve. 
v.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 60 

minutes of operation, complete with low wa-
ter level detection, dedicated direct breeching 
inlet and instantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 
4.  IF PLOT AREA IS MORE THAN 20,000  m2 
 
iv. Where a fire pump set is combined and serves 

yard hydrants and internal building systems, 
the capacity of the fire pump set shall be 1000 
gpm at a pressure as required to satisfy 6.9 
bar at the most remote Landing Valve and 
yard hydrant. 

v. Where fire pumpset serves only the yard fire 

hydrants, pump capacity shall be 1000 gpm at 
a pressure as required to satisfy 6.9 bar at the 
most remote hydrant valve. 

vi.  Combined Fire water tank shall have capacity 
of 60 minutes of operation, complete with low 
water level detection, dedicated direct 
breeching inlet and instantaneous refilling 
arrangement  

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 720 of 1348Table 9.24.: Parking Facility Fire Protection Systems 

FIRE PUMP AND FIRE WATER TANK CA-
PACITIES 

1.  IF COVERED/SHADED  PARKING AREA IS    

3600 m2  TO LESS THAN 20,000  m2   

 
iii. The capacity of the fire pump set shall be 50 
gpm at a pressure as required to satisfy 4.5 
bar at the most remote Hose reel outlet valve. 

iv. The water tank shall have capacity of 60 

minutes of operation, complete with low wa-
ter level detection and instantaneous refilling 
arrangement. 

 
 
2. 

IF COVERED/SHADED  PARKING AREA IS 
MORE THAN 20,000  m2   

 
iii. The fire pump set capacity shall be 1000 gpm. 
iv.  Fire water tank shall have capacity of 60 

minutes of operation, complete with low wa-
ter level detection, dedicated direct breeching 
inlet and instantaneous refilling arrangement  

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

1.  IF COVERED/SHADED  PARKING 
AREA IS 3600 m2   TO LESS THAN 
20,000  m2   

 
i.  Hose Reel System shall be pro-

vided throughout the building as 
per Section 3.3. 

ii.  Dry riser shall not be required. 
 
 
 
 
 
2.  IF COVERED/SHADED  PARKING 
AREA IS MORE THAN 20,000  m2   

 
i.  Yard Fire Hydrants shall be pro-
vided as per Section 3.11., in a 
loop to cover the entire develop-
ment. Where yard hydrants are 
provided, hose reel system shall 
not be required. 

ii.  Yard hydrants or hose reel sys-

tem shall not be required where 
infrastructure yard hydrants are 
available within 60 m of every 
exterior part of the structure. 

 

OCCUPAN-
CY 

D.  PARKING 
GROUP C  
COVERED /
SHADED 
PARKING 

 
HAVING ONE 
LEVEL ONLY 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 721 of 1348 

4.9.  Motor Fuel Dispensing Facility Fire Protection Systems 

 
4.9.1.  Motor fuel dispensing Facilities shall be provided with Fire protection Systems in 
compliance with Table 9.25. and Auxiliary Rooms Fire Protection Systems as per 
Table 9.30. 

 

Table 9.25.: Motor Fuel Dispensing Facility Fire Protection Systems 

PREDOMINANT                
OCCUPANCY 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS  FIRE PUMP SET AND FIRE 
WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

i.  Sprinklers shall be provided 
throughout the mini marts, 
restaurants, dining areas, 
business, retail, service Sta-
tions as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  A Hose Reel System shall be 

provided throughout the 
building as per Section 3.3. 

iii. Dry landing valves and ris-
ers shall not be required. 

A. GROUP A  

PETROL/GAS STATIONS HAVING           

UNDERGROUND FUEL STORAGE 

TANKS  

WITH MINI MARTS,                 

RESTAURANTS,  DINING,  FOOD 

COURTS, RETAIL,  BUSINESS 

AND SERVICE/REPAIR            

STATIONS AS INDIVIDUAL 

BUILDINGS 

 
 
 

iv.  The capacity of the fire pump set 
shall be 300 gpm at a pressure as 
required to satisfy 4.5 bar at the 
most remote Hose reel  outlet 
valve.. 

v.  The water tank shall have a ca-
pacity of 60 minutes of opera-
tion, complete with low water 
level detection, dedicated direct 
breeching inlet and instantane-
ous refilling arrangement. 

iii.   The capacity of the fire pump 

set shall be 50 gpm at pressure 
as required to satisfy 6.9 bar at 
the most remote hydrant outlet 
valve. 

iv.  The water tank shall have capaci-

ty of 60 minutes of operation, 
complete with low water level 
detection and instantaneous 
refilling arrangement. 

i.  A hose reel system shall be 

provided throughout the 
building as per Section 3.3. 

ii.  Dry landing valves and ris-
ers shall not be required. 

 
 

B. GROUP B  
 
PETROL/GAS STATIONS HAVING           
UNDERGROUND FUEL STORAGE 
TANKS  
 
WITH RESTAURANTS/BAKERIES, 
WITHIN A SINGLE MINI MART 
BUILDING AND SERVICE/REPAIR 
STATIONS 
 
FLEET VEHICLE  FUEL               
DISPENSING, 
 
MARINE MOTOR FUEL            
DISPENSING 

ii. NA. 

i.  Extinguishers shall be pro-
vided as per Chapter 4. Ta-
ble 4.3.2.8. 

C. GROUP C 
 
PETROL/GAS STATIONS HAVING           
UNDERGROUND FUEL STORAGE 
TANKS  
 
WITH MINI MARTS ONLY WITH-
OUT SERVICE/REPAIR STATIONS 
 
ELECTRIC CHARGING UNITS 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 722 of 1348 

4.10.  Infrastructure Fire Protection Systems 

 
4.10.1.  All new developments' infrastructure, marina developments, waterfront develop-

ments, theme parks, amusement parks and commercial developments shall be 
provided with Fire protection Systems in compliance with Table 9.26. and auxiliary 
rooms fire Protection Systems, if any, as per Table 9.30. 

 

Table 9.26.: Infrastructure Fire Protection Systems 

PREDOMINANT 
OCCUPANCY 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

FIRE PUMP SET AND FIRE  
WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

A.  INFRASTRUCTURE  
 
 

i.  Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided 

vi.   The capacity of the stand-alone 

as per Section 3.11. 

ii.  A combined network with irrigation 
network is not acceptable. The yard 
hydrant network shall be dedicated 
with dedicated fire pump and fire 
water tank. 

iii. A fire pump room and Fire water tank 
shall be provided in service blocks or 
suitable facility management block 
areas. 

iv. A dedicated corridor/Trench shall be 
provided for the Hydrant piping net-
work complete with strategic accessi-
ble manholes. 

v.  Yard hydrants shall be provided along 

the fire access road at interval as 
mentioned in Table 3.13. 

dedicated fire pump set, serving 
only the yard hydrant system 
shall be 1000 gpm at pressure 
as required to satisfy 6.9 bar at 
the most remote hydrant outlet 
valve. 

 
vii.  The water tank shall have a ca-
pacity of 90 minutes of opera-
tion, complete with low water 
level detection, dedicated direct 
breeching inlet and instantane-
ous refilling arrangement. 

 
viii.  TSE (Treated Sewage Water), 
tested as acceptable for fire 
protection purpose shall be ac-
ceptable upon submission of 
test reports to Civil Defence. 

 
ix.    Sweet water of lakes and ponds  

shall be acceptable, provided 
that an adequate water level 
reserve is ensured at all times. 

B.  MARINA AND   
WATERFRONT   
INFRASTRUCTURE 

i.  Marinas and waterfront property  
infrastructure and associated facili-
ties shall be provided with Fire Pro-
tection systems in accordance with 
Chapter 21, Table 21.4. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 723 of 1348 

4.11.  Storage, Warehouse and Industrial Facility Fire Protection Systems 

 

4.11.1.  Storage, warehouse and industrial facilities shall be provided with Fire protection Systems in com-

pliance with Table 9.27. and auxiliary rooms fire protection systems as per Table 9.30. However, all 
warehouse and industrial sprinkler protection designers shall first consider and consult the rele-
vant Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) before designing and proposing the sprinkler system. 

Table 9.27.: Storage, Warehouse and Industrial Fire Protection Systems 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

1.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR       
AREA IS LESS THAN 900 m2  AND EACH 
INDIVIDUAL UNIT COMPARTMENT AREA 
IS LESS THAN 230 m2 

1.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR         

AREA IS LESS THAN 900 m2  AND EACH 
INDIVIDUAL UNIT COMPARTMENT AR-
EA IS LESS THAN 230 m2 

PREDOMI-
NANT        
OCCUPANCY 

A. MULTI     
TENANT 
WAREHOUSE 
AND        
FACTORIES 
FOR RENTAL 
PURPOSE  

 
     (LIMITED TO 

 
i.  Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 
3.3. 

ii.  Hose Reel System shall be extended to 

mezzanine levels, if any. 

iii. Dry landing valves and risers shall not be 

required. 

 

i.  Sprinklers shall be provided throughout 

AREA IS MORE THAN 900 m2  OR ANY 
INDIVIDUAL UNIT COMPARTMENT AREA 
IS 230 m2 –UP TO 900 m2 

LIGHT     
 
2.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR        
HAZARD             
MATERIALS 
AS PER    
SECTION 
1.1.23,     
TABLE 9.1 
AND LIGHT 
HAZARD  
ACTIVITY AS 
PER SECTION 
1.1.24,     
TABLE 9.2.) 

gpm with area of sprinkler operation of 
1500 ft2 (140 m2). 

throughout the building as per Section 
3.3. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be 0.15 

iv. Dry landing valves and risers shall not be 

iii. Hose Reel System shall be provided 

the facility as per  Section 3.5. 

required. 

 

 
iv.  The capacity of the fire pump set shall 
be 50 gpm at a pressure as required to 
satisfy 4.5 bar at the most remote Hose 
reel outlet valve. 

v.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 
30 minutes of operation, complete with 
low water level detection and instanta-
neous refilling arrangement. 

 
2.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR        

AREA IS MORE THAN 900 m2  OR ANY 
INDIVIDUAL UNIT COMPARTMENT AR-
EA IS 230 m2 –UP TO 900 m2 

 
v. The capacity of the fire pump set shall be 
250 gpm at pressure as required to satis-
fy 4.5 bar at the most remote Hose reel 
outlet valve. 

vi.  The water tank shall have capacity of 45 
minutes of operation, complete with low 
water level detection and instantaneous 
refilling arrangement. 

 
3.  IF INDIVIDUAL COMPARTMENT OR 
UNIT AREA IS MORE THAN 900 m2  

 
iv. The capacity of the fire pump set shall be 

250 gpm at a pressure as required to 
satisfy 4.5 bar at the most remote hose 
reel valve. 

v.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 
60 minutes of operation, complete with 
low water level detection, dedicated di-
rect breeching inlet  and instantaneous 
refilling arrangement. 

 
4.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR BUILT-

UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 m2   

 
vi.   The capacity of the fire pump set shall 
be 750 gpm at a pressure as required to 
satisfy 6.9 bar at the most remote Hy-
drant valve. 

vii. The water tank shall have capacity of 60 
minutes of operation, complete with low 
water level detection, dedicated direct 
breeching inlet and instantaneous refill-
ing arrangement. 

 
 

 

3.  IF INDIVIDUAL COMPARTMENT OR UNIT 

AREA IS MORE THAN 900 m2  

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided throughout 

the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be 0.15 

gpm with area of sprinkler operation of 
1500 ft2 (140 m2). 

iii. Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 
3.3. 

 
4.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR BUILT-

UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 m2   

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided throughout 

the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  Sprinkler design density shall be 0.15 gpm 

with area of sprinkler operation of 1500 
ft2 (140 m2). 

iii. Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided as 
per Section 3.11., in a loop to cover the 
entire facility.  

iv. Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 
3.3. 

v.  Wet risers and internal landing valves 

shall not be required. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 724 of 1348 

Table 9.27.: Storage, Warehouse and Industrial Fire Protection Systems 

 

PREDOMI-
NANT        
OCCUPANCY 

B.  MULTI     

TENANT     
INDUSTRIES, 
AND        
FACTORIES  

 
(ORDINARY 
HAZARD, 
GROUP 1     
CATEGORY   
ACTIVITIES      
AS PER               
DEFINITION  
1.1.13.2.h.) 
 
 

 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

1.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR       
AREA IS LESS THAN 900 m2  AND EACH 
INDIVIDUAL UNIT COMPARTMENT 
AREA IS LESS THAN 230 m2 

1.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR         

AREA IS LESS THAN 900 m2  AND EACH 
INDIVIDUAL UNIT COMPARTMENT 
AREA IS LESS THAN 230 m2 

 
i.  Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 
3.3. 

ii.  Hose Reel System shall be extended to 

mezzanine levels, if any. 

iii. Dry landing valves and risers shall not 

be required. 

 
iv.   The capacity of the fire pump set shall 
be 50 gpm at a pressure as required to 
satisfy 4.5 bar at the most remote Hose 
reel outlet valve. 

v.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 

30 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection and in-
stantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 
 
 
2.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR        
2.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR        

AREA IS MORE THAN 900 m2  OR ANY 
INDIVIDUAL UNIT COMPARTMENT 
AREA IS 230 m2 –UP TO 900 m2 

i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per  Section 3.5. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be 

0.15 gpm with area of sprinkler opera-
tion of 1500 ft2 (140 m2). 

iii. Hose Reel System shall be provided 
throughout the building as per and 
Section 3.3. 

iv. Dry landing valves and risers shall not 

be required. 

 

 
 

3.  IF INDIVIDUAL COMPARTMENT OR 
UNIT AREA IS MORE THAN 900 m2  

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be 

0.15 gpm with area of sprinkler opera-
tion of 1500 ft2 (140 m2). 

iii. Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 
3.3. 

iv. Dry landing valves and risers shall not 

be required. 

 
 
4.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR BUILT

-UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 m2   

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  Sprinkler design density shall be 0.15 
gpm with area of sprinkler operation 
of 1500 ft2 (140 m2). 

iii. Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided as 

per Section 3.11., in a loop to cover 
the entire facility.  

iv. Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 
3.3. 

v.  Wet risers and internal landing valves 

shall not be required. 

AREA IS MORE THAN 900 m2  OR ANY 
INDIVIDUAL UNIT COMPARTMENT 
AREA IS 230 m2 –UP TO 900 m2 

 
v.   The capacity of the fire pump set shall 
be 300 gpm at pressure as required to 
satisfy 4.5 bar at the most remote Hose 
reel outlet valve. 

vi.  The water tank shall have capacity of 

45 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection and in-
stantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 
 
 
 
3.  IF INDIVIDUAL COMPARTMENT OR 
UNIT AREA IS MORE THAN 900 m2  

 
v.   The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be 300 gpm at a pressure as required 
to satisfy 4.5 bar at the most remote 
hose reel valve. 

vi.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 

60 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, dedi-
cated direct breeching inlet  and in-
stantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 
 
 
4.  4.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR 

BUILT-UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 
m2   

 
vi. The capacity of the fire pump set shall 
be 750 gpm at a pressure as required 
to satisfy 6.9 bar at the most remote 
Hydrant valve. 

vii. The water tank shall have capacity of 

60 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, dedi-
cated direct breeching inlet and instan-
taneous refilling arrangement. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 725 of 1348 

 

Table 9.27.: Storage, Warehouse and Industrial Fire Protection Systems 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

1.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR       
AREA IS LESS THAN 900 m2  AND EACH 
INDIVIDUAL UNIT COMPARTMENT 
AREA IS LESS THAN 230 m2 

1.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR         

AREA IS LESS THAN 900 m2  AND EACH 
INDIVIDUAL UNIT COMPARTMENT 
AREA IS LESS THAN 230 m2 

 
i.  Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 
3.3. 

ii.  Hose Reel System shall be extended to 

mezzanine levels, if any. 

iii. Dry landing valves and risers shall not 

be required. 

 
iv.   The capacity of the fire pump set shall 
be 50 gpm at a pressure as required to 
satisfy 4.5 bar at the most remote Hose 
reel outlet valve. 

v.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 

30 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection and in-
stantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 
 
 
2.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR        
2.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR        

AREA IS MORE THAN 900 m2  OR ANY 
INDIVIDUAL UNIT COMPARTMENT 
AREA IS 230 m2 –UP TO 900 m2 

 

 

i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per  Section 3.5. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be 

0.20 gpm with area of sprinkler opera-
tion of 1500 ft2 (140 m2). 

iii. Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 
3.3. No dry landing valves required. 

3.  IF INDIVIDUAL COMPARTMENT OR 
UNIT AREA IS MORE THAN 900 m2  

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be 

0.20 gpm with area of sprinkler opera-
tion of 1500 ft2 (140 m2). 

iii. Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 
3.3. No dry landing valves required. 

 
 
4.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR BUILT

-UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 m2   

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  Sprinkler design density shall be 0.20 
gpm with area of sprinkler operation 
of 1500 ft2 (140 m2). 

iii. Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided as 

per Section 3.11., in a loop to cover 
the entire facility.  

iv. Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 
3.3.  

v.  Wet risers and internal landing valves 

shall not be required. 

AREA IS MORE THAN 900 m2  OR ANY 
INDIVIDUAL UNIT COMPARTMENT 
AREA IS 230 m2 –UP TO 900 m2 

 
iv.   The capacity of the fire pump set shall 
be 350 gpm at pressure as required to 
satisfy 4.5 bar at the most remote Hose 
reel outlet valve. 

v.  The water tank shall have capacity of 

45 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection and in-
stantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 
3.  IF INDIVIDUAL COMPARTMENT OR 
UNIT AREA IS MORE THAN 900 m2  

 
iv.   The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be 350 gpm at a pressure as required 
to satisfy 4.5 bar at the most remote 
hose reel valve. 

v.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 

60 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, dedi-
cated direct breeching inlet  and in-
stantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 
4.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR BUILT-

UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 m2   

 
vi.   The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be 750 gpm at a pressure as required 
to satisfy 6.9 bar at the most remote 
Hydrant valve. 

vii. The water tank shall have capacity of 

60 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, dedi-
cated direct breeching inlet and instan-
taneous refilling arrangement. 

PREDOMI-
NANT        
OCCUPANCY 

C.  MULTI     

TENANT     
INDUSTRIES, 
AND        
FACTORIES  

 
(ORDINARY 
HAZARD, 
GROUP 2     
CATEGORY   
ACTIVITIES      
AS PER               
DEFINITION  
1.1.13.3.c.) 
 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 726 of 1348 

Table 9.27.: Storage, Warehouse and Industrial Fire Protection Systems 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

1.  IF TOTAL GROUND FLOOR BUILT-UP 

AREA IS LESS THAN 3600 m2  

 

i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be 

0.30 gpm with area of sprinkler opera-
tion of 2500 ft2 (232 m2). 

iii. Hose Reel System shall be provided 
throughout the building as per        
Section 3.3. 

iv. Dry landing valves and risers shall not 

be required. 

 
 
2.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR BUILT

-UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 m2   

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  Sprinkler design density shall be 0.30 
gpm with area of sprinkler operation 
of 2500 ft2 (232 m2). 

iii. Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided as 

per Section 3.11., in a loop to cover 
the entire facility.  

iv. Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 
3.3.  

v.  Wet risers and internal landing valves 

shall not be required. 

1.  IF TOTAL GROUND FLOOR BUILT-UP 

AREA IS LESS THAN 3600 m2  

 
v. The capacity of the fire pump set shall 
be 750 gpm at pressure as required to 
satisfy 4.5 bar at the most remote Hose 
reel outlet valve. 

vi.  The water tank shall have capacity of 

60 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection and in-
stantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 
 
 
 
2.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR BUILT-

UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 m2   

 
vi.  The capacity of the fire pump set shall 
be 1250 gpm at a pressure as required 
to satisfy 6.9 bar at the most remote 
Hydrant valve. 

vii. The water tank shall have capacity of 

90 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, dedi-
cated direct breeching inlet and instan-
taneous refilling arrangement. 

PREDOMI-
NANT        
OCCUPANCY 

D.  MULTI     
TENANT     
INDUSTRIES, 
AND        
FACTORIES  

 
(EXTRA        
HAZARD, 
GROUP 1     
CATEGORY   
ACTIVITIES      
AS PER               
DEFINITION  
1.1.13.4.a.) 
 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 727 of 1348 

Table 9.27.: Storage, Warehouse and Industrial Fire Protection Systems 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

1.  IF TOTAL GROUND FLOOR BUILT-UP 

AREA IS LESS THAN 3600 m2  

 

i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be 

0.40 gpm with area of sprinkler opera-
tion of 2500 ft2 (232 m2). 

iii. Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 
3.3. 

iv. Dry landing valves and risers shall not 

be required. 

 

 
2.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR BUILT

-UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 m2   

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  Sprinkler design density shall be 0.40 
gpm with area of sprinkler operation 
of 2500 ft2 (232 m2). 

iii. Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided as 

per Section 3.11., in a loop to cover 
the entire facility.  

iv. Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 
3.3.  

v.  Wet risers and internal landing valves 

shall not be required. 

1.  IF TOTAL GROUND FLOOR BUILT-UP 

AREA IS LESS THAN 3600 m2  

 
v.   The capacity of the fire pump set shall 
be 1000 gpm at pressure as required to 
satisfy 4.5 bar at the most remote Hose 
reel outlet valve. 

vi.  The water tank shall have capacity of 

60 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection and in-
stantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 
 
 
 
4.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR BUILT-

UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 m2   

 
vi.   The capacity of the fire pump set shall 
be 1500 gpm at a pressure as required 
to satisfy 6.9 bar at the most remote 
Hydrant valve. 

vii.  The water tank shall have capacity of 
120 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, dedi-
cated direct breeching inlet and in-
stantaneous refilling arrangement. 

PREDOMI-
NANT        
OCCUPANCY 

E.  MULTI     

TENANT     
INDUSTRIES, 
AND        
FACTORIES  

 
(EXTRA        
HAZARD, 
GROUP 2     
CATEGORY   
ACTIVITIES      
AS PER               
DEFINITION  
1.1.13.5.a.) 
 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 728 of 1348 

Table 9.27.: Storage, Warehouse and Industrial Fire Protection Systems 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

1.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR          

1.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR           

AREA IS LESS THAN 900 m2   

AREA IS LESS THAN 900 m2   

 
i.  Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 
3.3. 

ii.  Dry landing valves and risers shall not 

be required. 

 
iii. The capacity of the fire pump set shall 
be 50 gpm at a pressure as required to 
satisfy 4.5 bar at the most remote 
Hose reel outlet valve. 

iv. The water tank shall have a capacity of 

AREA IS 900 m2—3600 m2 

45 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection and 
instantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 
LIGHT     
 
HAZARD             
 
MATERIALS 
 
 
2.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR           
AS PER    
2.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR           
SECTION 
1.1.23,     
TABLE 9.1 
AND LIGHT 
HAZARD  
ACTIVITY AS 
PER SECTION 
1.1.24,     
TABLE 9.2.) 

 
iv. The capacity of the fire pump set shall 
be 250 gpm at a pressure as required 
to satisfy 4.5 bar at the most remote 
Hose reel outlet valve. 

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

throughout the building as per Section 
3.3. No dry landing valves required. 

0.15 gpm with area of sprinkler opera-
tion of 1500 ft2 (140 m2). 

v.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 

iii. Hose Reel System shall be provided 

out the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be 

AREA IS 900 m2—3600 m2 

60 minutes of operation, dedicated 
direct breeching inlet complete with 
low water level detection, dedicated 
direct breeching inlet and instantane-
ous refilling arrangement. 

 
 
 
 
3.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR BUILT-

UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 m2   

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  Sprinkler design density shall be 0.15 
gpm with an area of sprinkler opera-
tion of 1500 ft2 (140 m2). 

iii. Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided as 

per Section 3.11., in a loop to cover 
the entire facility.  

iv. Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 
3.3. 

v.  Wet risers and internal landing valves 

shall not be required. 

 
 
3.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR BUILT

-UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 m2   

 
vi.  The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be 750 gpm at a pressure as required 
to satisfy 6.9 bar at the most remote 
landing valve. 

vii. The water tank shall have a capacity 
of 60 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, dedi-
cated direct breeching inlet and in-
stantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 
 

PREDOMI-
NANT        
OCCUPANCY 

F.  SINGLE    
TENANT 
WAREHOUSE 
AND        
FACTORIES  

 
      (LIMITED TO 

 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 729 of 1348 

Table 9.27.: Storage, Warehouse and Industrial Fire Protection Systems 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

1.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR          

1.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR           

AREA IS LESS THAN 900 m2   

 
i.  Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 
3.3. 

ii.  Dry landing valves and risers shall not 

AREA IS LESS THAN 900 m2   

 
iii.   The capacity of the fire pump set 
shall be 50 gpm at a pressure as re-
quired to satisfy 4.5 bar at the most 
remote Hose reel outlet valve. 

be required. 

 
 
 
 
 
2.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR           
2.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR           

iv.  The water tank shall have a capacity 
of 45 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection and 
instantaneous refilling arrangement. 

AREA IS 900 m2—3600 m2 

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be 

0.15 gpm with area of sprinkler opera-
tion of 1500 ft2 (140 m2). 

iii. Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 
3.3. 

 
 
 
3.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR BUILT-

UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 m2   

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  Sprinkler design density shall be 0.15 
gpm with an area of sprinkler opera-
tion of 1500 ft2 (140 m2). 

iii. Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided as 

per Section 3.11., in a loop to cover 
the entire facility.  

iv. Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 
3.3. 

v.  Wet risers and internal landing valves 

shall not be required. 

AREA IS 900 m2—3600 m2 

 
iv.   The capacity of the fire pump set 

shall be 300 gpm at a pressure as re-
quired to satisfy 4.5 bar at the most 
remote Hose reel outlet valve. 

v.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 

60 minutes of operation, dedicated 
direct breeching inlet complete with 
low water level detection, dedicated 
direct breeching inlet and instantane-
ous refilling arrangement. 

 
3.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR BUILT

-UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 m2   

 
vi.  The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be 750 gpm at a pressure as required 
to satisfy 6.9 bar at the most remote 
landing valve. 

vii. The water tank shall have a capacity 
of 60 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, dedi-
cated direct breeching inlet and in-
stantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 
 

PREDOMI-
NANT        
OCCUPANCY 

G.  SINGLE    
TENANT     
INDUSTRIES, 
AND        
FACTORIES  

 
(ORDINARY 
HAZARD, 
GROUP 1     
CATEGORY   
ACTIVITIES      
AS PER               
DEFINITION  
1.1.13.2.h.) 
 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 730 of 1348 

Table 9.27.: Storage, Warehouse and Industrial Fire Protection Systems 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

1.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR          

1.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR           

AREA IS LESS THAN 900 m2   

 
i.  Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 
3.3. 

ii.  Dry landing valves and risers shall not 

be required. 

AREA IS LESS THAN 900 m2   

 
iii.  The capacity of the fire pump set shall 
be 50 gpm at a pressure as required to 
satisfy 4.5 bar at the most remote 
Hose reel outlet valve. 

iv. The water tank shall have a capacity of 

 
 
 
 
 
2.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR           
2.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR           

45 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection and 
instantaneous refilling arrangement. 

AREA IS 900 m2—3600 m2 

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be 

0.20 gpm with area of sprinkler opera-
tion of 1500 ft2 (140 m2). 

iii. Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 
3.3. Dry landing valves shall not be re-
quired. 

 
 
 
3.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR BUILT-

UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 m2   

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  Sprinkler design density shall be 0.20 
gpm with an area of sprinkler opera-
tion of 1500 ft2 (140 m2). 

iii. Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided as 

per Section 3.11., in a loop to cover 
the entire facility.  

iv. Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 
3.3. 

v.  Wet risers and internal landing valves 

shall not be required. 

AREA IS 900 m2—3600 m2 

 
iv.  The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be 350 gpm at a pressure as required 
to satisfy 4.5 bar at the most remote 
Hose reel  outlet valve. 

v.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 

60 minutes of operation, dedicated 
direct breeching inlet complete with 
low water level detection, dedicated 
direct breeching inlet and instantane-
ous refilling arrangement. 

 
3.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR BUILT

-UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 m2   

 
vi.   The capacity of the fire pump set 

shall be 750 gpm at a pressure as re-
quired to satisfy 6.9 bar at the most 
remote landing valve. 

vii.  The water tank shall have a capacity 
of 60 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, dedi-
cated direct breeching inlet and in-
stantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 
 

PREDOMI-
NANT        
OCCUPANCY 

H.  SINGLE    
TENANT     
INDUSTRIES, 
AND        
FACTORIES  

 
(ORDINARY 
HAZARD, 
GROUP 2     
CATEGORY   
ACTIVITIES      
AS PER               
DEFINITION  
1.1.13.3.c.) 
 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 731 of 1348 

Table 9.27.: Storage, Warehouse and Industrial Fire Protection Systems 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

1.  IF TOTAL GROUND FLOOR BUILT-UP 

AREA IS LESS THAN 3600 m2  

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be 

0.30 gpm with area of sprinkler opera-
tion of 2500 ft2 (232 m2). 

iii. Where activity and material MSDS de-

mands foam sprinkler system, Foam 
Sprinklers shall be provided through-
out the facility as per Section 3.9. 

iv. Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 
3.3. Dry landing valves shall not be re-
quired. 

 
 
2.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR BUILT-

UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 m2   

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  Sprinkler design density shall be 0.30 
gpm with an area of sprinkler opera-
tion of 2500 ft2 (232 m2). 

iii. Where activity and material MSDS de-

mands foam sprinkler system, Foam 
Sprinklers shall be provided through-
out the facility as per Section 3.9. 

1.  IF TOTAL GROUND FLOOR BUILT-UP 

AREA IS LESS THAN 3600 m2  

 
v. The capacity of the fire pump set shall 
be 750 gpm at pressure as required to 
satisfy 4.5 bar at the most remote 
Hose reel outlet valve. 

vi.  The water tank shall have capacity of 

60 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection and 
instantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR BUILT

-UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 m2   

 
vii. The capacity of the fire pump set shall 
be 1250 gpm at a pressure as required 
to satisfy 6.9 bar at the most remote 
landing valve. 

viii. The water tank shall have a capacity 
of 90 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, dedi-
cated direct breeching inlet and in-
stantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 
 

PREDOMI-
NANT        
OCCUPANCY 

I.  SINGLE    

TENANT     
INDUSTRIES, 
AND        
FACTORIES  

 
(EXTRA        
HAZARD, 
GROUP 1     
CATEGORY   
ACTIVITIES      
AS PER               
DEFINITION  
1.1.13.4.a.) 
 
 

iv. Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided as 

per Section 3.11., in a loop to cover 
the entire facility.  

v.  Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 
3.3. 

vi. A dry riser and wet riser System shall 

not be required. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 732 of 1348PREDOMI-
NANT        
OCCUPANCY 

J.  SINGLE    

TENANT     
INDUSTRIES, 
AND        
FACTORIES  

 
(EXTRA        
HAZARD, 
GROUP 2     
CATEGORY   
ACTIVITIES      
AS PER               
DEFINITION  
1.1.13.5.a.) 
 
 

AREA IS LESS THAN 3600 m2 

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be 

0.40 gpm with area of sprinkler opera-
tion of 2500 ft2 (232 m2). 

iii. Where activity and material MSDS de-

mands foam sprinkler system, Foam 
Sprinklers shall be provided through-
out the facility as per Section 3.9. 

iv. Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 
3.3. Dry landing valves shall not be re-
quired. 

 
 
3.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR BUILT-

UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 m2   

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  Sprinkler design density shall be 0.40 
gpm with an area of sprinkler opera-
tion of 2500 ft2 (232 m2). 

iii. Where activity and material MSDS de-

mands foam sprinkler system, Foam 
Sprinklers shall be provided through-
out the facility as per Section 3.9. 

AREA IS LESS THAN 3600 m2 

 
v. The capacity of the fire pump set shall 
be 1000 gpm at a pressure as required 
to satisfy 4.5 bar at the most remote 
Hose reel outlet valve. 

vi.  The water tank shall have a capacity 

of 60 minutes of operation, dedicated 
direct breeching inlet complete with 
low water level detection, dedicated 
direct breeching inlet and instantane-
ous refilling arrangement. 

 
 
 
 
3.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR BUILT

-UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 m2   

 
vii. The capacity of the fire pump set shall 
be 1500 gpm at a pressure as required 
to satisfy 6.9 bar at the most remote 
landing valve. 

viii. The water tank shall have a capacity 

of 120 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, dedi-
cated direct breeching inlet and in-
stantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 

Table 9.27.: Storage, Warehouse and Industrial Fire Protection Systems 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

1.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR           

1.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR           

iv. Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided as 

per Section 3.11., in a loop to cover 
the entire facility.  

v.  Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 
3.3.  

vi. A dry riser and wet riser System shall 

 
 

not be required. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 733 of 1348 

Table 9.27.: Storage, Warehouse and Industrial Fire Protection Systems 

PREDOMINANT         
OCCUPANCY 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

1. IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR 

AREA IS LESS THAN 900 m2   

1.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR 

AREA IS LESS THAN 900 m2   

 
i.  Hose Reel System shall be provided 
throughout the building as per Sec-
tion 3.3. 

ii.  Dry landing valves and risers shall not 

be required. 

 
 
 
2.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR 

AREA IS 900 m2 - 3600 m2   

 

i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be 

as per storage height and arrange-
ment, in accordance with Table 
9.7.G., P.7.H., 9.7.I., Table 9.7.J., Ta-
ble 9.7.K., Table 9.7.L. 

iii. Hose Reel System shall be provided 
throughout the building as per Sec-
tion 3.3. Dry landing valves shall not 
be required. 

 

 

 

3.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR 
BUILT-UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 
3600 m2   

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be 

as per storage height and arrange-
ment, in accordance with Table 
9.7.G., P.7.H., 9.7.I., Table 9.7.J., Ta-
ble 9.7.K., Table 9.7.L. 

iii. Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided 
as per Section 3.11., in a loop to cov-
er the entire facility.  

iv. Hose Reel System shall be provided 
throughout the building as per Sec-
tion 3.3.  

v.  A dry riser and wet riser System shall 

not be required. 

 
iii. The fire pump capacity shall be 50 

gpm at pressure of 4.5 bar available at 
the remote Hose reel valve. 

iv. Water tank shall have capacity of 45 
minutes of operation, complete with 
low water level detection and instan-
taneous refilling arrangement. 

 
2.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR 

AREA IS 900 m2 - 3600 m2   

 
iv. The capacity of the fire pump set shall 
be as per storage height and arrange-
ment, in accordance with Table 
9.7.G., P.7.H., 9.7.I., Table 9.7.J., Ta-
ble 9.7.K., Table 9.7.L., at pressure as 
required to satisfy 4.5 bar at the most 
remote hose reel valve. 

v.  The water tank shall have capacity of 

60 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, dedi-
cated direct breeching inlet and in-
stantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 
 
3.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR 

BUILT-UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 
m2   

 
 
vi.  The capacity of the fire pump set 

shall be as per storage height and ar-
rangement, in accordance with Table 
9.7.G., P.7.H., 9.7.I., Table 9.7.J., Ta-
ble 9.7.K., Table 9.7.L., at pressure as 
required to satisfy 6.9 bar at the most 
remote Hydrant valve. 

vii.  The water tank shall have capacity of 

60 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, dedi-
cated direct breeching inlet and in-
stantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 
 

K.  WAREHOUSE  
 
IDLE  WOODEN 
AND PLASTIC  
PALLETS 
 
     

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 734 of 1348 

 

Table 9.27.: Storage, Warehouse and Industrial Fire Protection Systems 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

1.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR       

1.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR       

AREA IS LESS THAN 230 m2 

 
i.  Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 3.3. 
Dry landing valves shall not be required. 

 
 
 
 
 
2.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA 

AREA IS LESS THAN 230 m2 

 
ii.  The fire pump capacity shall be 50 gpm 

at pressure of 4.5 bar available at the 
remote hose reel valve. 

iii.  The water tank shall have capacity of 45 
minutes of operation, complete with low 
water level detection and instantaneous 
refilling arrangement. 

 
2.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AR-

OF THE COMPARTMENT IS                                     
230 m2—900 m2  

EA OF THE COMPARTMENT IS                                     
230 m2—900 m2  

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided throughout the 

 
iv. The capacity of the fire pump set shall be 

CLASS I—IV            
MATERIALS  

OCCUPAN-
CY 

L.  WARE-

HOUSE  

 
     WITH           

 
    

(IDENTIFICA
TION OF    
CLASSES OF 
MATERIALS 
SHALL BE AS 
PER         
SECTION 
1.1.25 OF 
THIS         
CHAPTER) 

facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be as per 
storage height and arrangement, in accord-
ance with Table 9.7.M., 9.7.O., Table 
9.7.P., Table 9.7.R., 9.7.S.,  9,7.T.,  9.7.U., 
9.7.V. 9.7.Y., 9.7.X., 9.7.Z.a., 9.7.Z.b., 
9.7.Z.c., 9.7.AA., 9.7.BB., and 9.7.CC.   

iii. Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 3.3. 
Dry landing valves shall not be required. 

 
 
 
3.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA 

IS 901 m2 - 3600 m2   

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided throughout the 

facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be as per 
storage height and arrangement, in accord-
ance with Table 9.7.M., 9.7.O., Table 
9.7.P., Table 9.7.R., 9.7.S.,  9,7.T.,  9.7.U., 
9.7.V. 9.7.Y., 9.7.X., 9.7.Z.a., 9.7.Z.b., 
9.7.Z.c., 9.7.AA., 9.7.BB., and 9.7.CC.   

iii. Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 3.3. 
Dry landing valves shall not be required. 

 
 
 
 
4.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR BUILT-UP 

AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 m2   

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided throughout the 

facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be as per 
storage height and arrangement, in accord-
ance with Table 9.7.M., 9.7.O., Table 
9.7.P., Table 9.7.R., 9.7.S.,  9,7.T.,  9.7.U., 
9.7.V. 9.7.Y., 9.7.X., 9.7.Z.a., 9.7.Z.b., 
9.7.Z.c., 9.7.AA., 9.7.BB., and 9.7.CC.   

iii. Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided as per 
Section 3.11., in a loop to cover the entire 
facility.  

as per storage height and storage ar-
rangement, in accordance with Table 
9.7.M., 9.7.O., Table 9.7.P., Table 9.7.R., 
9.7.S.,  9,7.T.,  9.7.U., 9.7.V. 9.7.Y., 
9.7.X., 9.7.Z.a., 9.7.Z.b., 9.7.Z.c., 9.7.AA., 
9.7.BB., and 9.7.CC.  at a pressure as re-
quired to satisfy 4.5 bar at the most re-
mote Hose reel valve. 

v.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 
60 minutes of operation, complete with 
low water level detection and instanta-
neous refilling arrangement. 

 
3.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AR-

EA IS 901 m2 - 3600 m2   

 
iv. The capacity of the fire pump set shall be 

as per storage height and storage ar-
rangement, in accordance with Table 
9.7.M., 9.7.O., Table 9.7.P., Table 9.7.R., 
9.7.S.,  9,7.T.,  9.7.U., 9.7.V. 9.7.Y., 
9.7.X., 9.7.Z.a., 9.7.Z.b., 9.7.Z.c., 9.7.AA., 
9.7.BB., and 9.7.CC.  at a pressure as re-
quired to satisfy 4.5 bar at the most re-
mote hose reel valve. 

v.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 
60 minutes of operation, complete with 
low water level detection, direct breech-
ing inlet and instantaneous refilling ar-
rangement. 

 
4.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR BUILT-

UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 m2   

 
vi.  The capacity of the fire pump set shall 
be as per storage height and storage ar-
rangement, in accordance with Table 
9.7.M., 9.7.O., Table 9.7.P., Table 9.7.R., 
9.7.S.,  9,7.T.,  9.7.U., 9.7.V. 9.7.Y., 
9.7.X., 9.7.Z.a., 9.7.Z.b., 9.7.Z.c., 9.7.AA., 
9.7.BB., and 9.7.CC.  at a pressure as re-
quired to satisfy 6.9 bar at the most re-
mote Hydrant valve. 

vii.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 
60 minutes of operation, complete with 
low water level detection, direct breech-
ing inlet and instantaneous refilling ar-
rangement. 

iv. Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 3.3.  

v.  A dry riser and wet riser System shall not 

be required. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 735 of 1348 

 
 
PREDOMI-
NANT          
OCCUPANCY 

M.  WAREHOUSE  
 
     PLASTIC,     
RUBBER,   

 
     

Table 9.27.: Storage, Warehouse and Industrial Fire Protection Systems 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

1.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR 

1.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR 

AREA OF THE COMPARTMENT IS 
LESS THAN 230 m2   

 
i.  Hose Reel System shall be provided 
throughout the building as per Sec-
tion 3.3. 

AREA OF THE COMPARTMENT IS LESS 
THAN 230 m2   

 
iii.  The fire pump capacity shall be 50 

gpm at a pressure of 4.5 bar available 
at the remote Hose reel valve. 

ii.  Dry landing valves and risers shall not 

iv.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 

be required. 

 
 
 
2.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR 

AREA OF THE COMPARTMENT IS  
230 m2—900 m2  

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be 

as per storage height and storage 
arrangement, in accordance with 
9.7.X., 9.7.DD.,and 9.7.EE.    

iii. Hose Reel System shall be provided 
throughout the building as per Sec-
tion 3.3. Dry landing valves are not 
required. 

 
 
 
3.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR 

AREA IS 901 m2 - 3600 m2   

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be 

as per storage height and storage 
arrangement, in accordance with 
9.7.X., 9.7.DD.,and 9.7.EE.      

iii. Hose Reel System shall be provided 
throughout the building as per Sec-
tion 3.3. Dry landing valves are not 
required. 

 
 

60 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection and in-
stantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 
2.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR 

AREA OF THE COMPARTMENT IS     
230 m2—900 m2  

 
iv. The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be as per storage height and storage 
arrangement, in accordance with 
9.7.X., 9.7.DD., and 9.7.EE.  at a pres-
sure as required to satisfy 4.5 bar at 
the most remote Hose reel valve. 

v.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 

60 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, direct 
breeching inlet and instantaneous re-
filling arrangement. 

 
 
3.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR 

AREA IS 901 m2 - 3600 m2   

 
iv. The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be as per storage height and storage 
arrangement, in accordance with 
9.7.X., 9.7.DD.,and 9.7.EE. at a pres-
sure as required to satisfy 4.5 bar at 
the most remote hose reel valve. 

v.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 

90 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, direct 
breeching inlet and instantaneous re-
filling arrangement. 

 
4.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR BUILT

-UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 m2   

 
 
vi.  The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be as per storage height and storage 
arrangement, in accordance with 
9.7.X., 9.7.DD.,and 9.7.EE. at a pres-
sure as required to satisfy 6.9 bar at 
the most remote Hydrant valve. 

vii.  The water tank shall have a capacity 
of 90 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, direct 
breeching inlet and instantaneous re-
filling arrangement. 

4.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR 
BUILT-UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 
3600 m2   

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be 

as per storage height and storage 
arrangement, in accordance with 
9.7.X., 9.7.DD., and 9.7.EE.      

iii. Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided 
as per Section 3.11., in a loop to cov-
er the entire facility.  

iv. Hose Reel System shall be provided 
throughout the building as per Sec-
tion 3.3.  

 

v.  A dry riser and wet riser System shall 

not be required. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 736 of 1348Table 9.27.: Storage, Warehouse and Industrial Fire Protection Systems 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

1.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP FLOOR AREA OF 
THE COMPARTMENT IS LESS THAN 
230 m2   

 
i.  Hose Reel System shall be provided 
throughout the building as per and 
Section 3.3. 

ii.  Dry landing valves and risers shall not 

1.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP FLOOR AREA OF 
THE COMPARTMENT IS LESS THAN  
230 m2   

 
iii.  The fire pump capacity shall be 50 gpm 
at a pressure of 4.5 bar available at the 
remote Hose reel valve. 

iv.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 

be required. 

 
 
 
2.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP FLOOR AREA OF 

THE COMPARTMENT IS                   
230 m2—900 m2  

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be 

as per storage height and storage 
arrangement, in accordance with  
Table 9.7.FF.    

iii. Hose Reel System shall be provided 
throughout the building as per Sec-
tion 3.3. Dry landing valves are not 
required. 

45 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection and in-
stantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 
2.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP FLOOR AREA OF 
THE COMPARTMENT IS                       
230 m2—900 m2  

 
iv. The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be as per storage height and storage 
arrangement, in accordance with           
Table 9.7.FF. at a pressure as required 
to satisfy 4.5 bar at the most remote 
Hose reel valve. 

v.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 

60 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection and in-
stantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 
3.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP FLOOR AREA IS                      

 
3.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP FLOOR AREA IS         

 

 
 

PREDOMI-
NANT          
OCCUPANCY 

N.  WAREHOUSE  
 
     TIRES   
 
     

901 m2 - 3600 m2   

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be 

as per storage height and storage 
arrangement, in accordance with Ta-
ble 9.7.FF.         

iii. Hose Reel System shall be provided 
throughout the building as per Sec-
tion 3.3. Dry landing valves are not 
required. 

 
 

4.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR 
BUILT-UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 
3600 m2   

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be 

as per storage height and storage 
arrangement, in accordance with Ta-
ble 9.7.FF.         

iii. Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided 
as per Section 3.11., in a loop to cov-
er the entire facility.  

iv. Hose Reel System shall be provided 
throughout the building as per Sec-
tion 3.3.  

v.  A dry riser and wet riser System shall 

not be required. 

 

901 m2 - 3600 m2   

 
iv. The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be as per storage height and storage 
arrangement, in accordance with           
Table 9.7.FF. at a pressure as required 
to satisfy 4.5 bar at the most remote 
hose reel valve. 

v.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 

90 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection direct 
breeching inlet and instantaneous re-
filling arrangement. 

 
4.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR BUILT-

UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 m2   

 
 
vi. The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be as per storage height and storage 
arrangement, in accordance with Table 
9.7.FF. at a pressure as required to 
satisfy 6.9 bar at the most remote Hy-
drant valve. 

vii. The water tank shall have a capacity of 

90 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, direct 
breeching inlet and instantaneous re-
filling arrangement. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 737 of 1348 

 
 
PREDOMI-
NANT          
OCCUPANCY 

Table 9.27.: Storage, Warehouse and Industrial Fire Protection Systems 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

1.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP FLOOR AREA OF 
THE COMPARTMENT IS LESS THAN 
230 m2   

O.  WAREHOUSE  
 
     ROLLED PAPER   
 
 
i.  Hose Reel System shall be provided 
     
throughout the building as per Sec-
tion 3.3. 

1.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP FLOOR AREA OF 
THE COMPARTMENT IS LESS THAN 
230 m2   

 
iii.  The fire pump capacity shall be 50 

gpm at a pressure of 4.5 bar available 
at the remote Hose reel valve. 

ii.  Dry landing valves and risers shall not 

iv.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 

be required. 

 
 
 
2.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP FLOOR AREA OF 

THE COMPARTMENT IS                   
230 m2—900 m2  

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be 

as per storage height and storage 
arrangement, in accordance with  
Table 9.7.GG.    

iii. Hose Reel System shall be provided 
throughout the building as per Sec-
tion 3.3. Dry landing valves are not 
required. 

45 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection and in-
stantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 
2.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP FLOOR AREA OF 
THE COMPARTMENT IS                      
230 m2—900 m2  

 
iv. The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be as per storage height and storage 
arrangement, in accordance with           
Table 9.7.GG. at a pressure as required 
to satisfy 4.5 bar at the most remote 
Hose reel valve. 

v.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 

60 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection and in-
stantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 
 
3.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP FLOOR AREA IS                      

 
 
3.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP FLOOR AREA IS         

901 m2 - 3600 m2   

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be 

as per storage height and storage 
arrangement, in accordance with  
Table 9.7.GG.         

iii. Hose Reel System shall be provided 
throughout the building as per Sec-
tion 3.3. Dry landing valves are not 
required 

 
 

4.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR 
BUILT-UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 
3600 m2   

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be 

as per storage height and storage 
arrangement, in accordance with  
Table 9.7.GG.         

iii. Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided 
as per Section 3.11., in a loop to cov-
er the entire facility.  

iv. Hose Reel System shall be provided 
throughout the building as per Sec-
tion 3.3.  

v.  A dry riser and wet riser System shall 

not be required. 

 

901 m2 - 3600 m2   

 
iv. The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be as per storage height and storage 
arrangement, in accordance with            
Table 9.7.GG. at a pressure as required 
to satisfy 4.5 bar at the most remote 
hose reel valve. 

v.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 

90 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, direct 
breeching inlet and instantaneous re-
filling arrangement. 

 
4.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR BUILT

-UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 m2   

 
 
vi.  The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be as per storage height and storage 
arrangement, in accordance with           
Table 9.7.GG. at a pressure as required 
to satisfy 6.9 bar at the most remote 
Hydrant valve. 

vii.  The water tank shall have a capacity 
of 90 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, direct 
breeching inlet and instantaneous re-
filling arrangement. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 738 of 1348 

Table 9.27.: Storage, Warehouse and Industrial Fire Protection Systems 

OCCUPANCY  SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

P. COLD        
STORAGE 

 
(STORAGE         
FACILITIES WITH 
BELOW 40C     
TEMPERATURES) 
 
 

1.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP FLOOR AREA IS 

LESS THAN 230 m2 

 
i.  Hose Reel System shall be provided 
throughout the building as per Sec-
tion 3.3. 

ii.  Dry landing valves and risers shall not 

be required. 

 
 
 
 
2.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP FLOOR AREA IS  

BETWEEN 230 m2—900 m2   

 

i.  Dry Type Sprinklers shall be provided 

throughout the facility as per         
Section 3.6. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be 
as per hazard classification, storage 
height and storage arrangement, in 
accordance with Table 9.7.H., Table 
9.7.I., Table 9.8.A., Table 9.7.Z.a., 
9.7.Z.b., Table 9.7.AA.a., 9.7.AA.b., 
and 9.7.AA.c.,  

iii. Hose Reel System shall be provided 
throughout the building as per Sec-
tion 3.3. Dry landing valves shall not 
be required. 

 

 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

1.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP FLOOR AREA IS 

LESS THAN 230 m2 

 
iii.   The capacity of the fire pump set 
shall be 50 gpm at a pressure as re-
quired to satisfy 4.5 bar at the most 
remote Hose reel outlet valve. 

iv.  The water tank shall have a capacity 
of 30 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection and 
instantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 
2.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP FLOOR AREA IS  

BETWEEN 230 m2—900 m2   

 
iv. The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be as per storage height and storage 
arrangement, in accordance with Ta-
ble 9.7.H., Table 9.7.I., Table 9.8.A., 
Table 9.7.Z.a., 9.7.Z.b., Table 
9.7.AA.a., 9.7.AA.b., and 9.7.AA.c., at 
a pressure as required to satisfy 4.5 
bar at the most remote Hose reel 
valve. 

v.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 

45 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection and 
instantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 
 
 
3.  IF TOTAL FLOOR AREA IS  BETWEEN                    

901 m2—3600 m2   

 
iv. The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be as per storage height and storage 
arrangement, in accordance Table 
9.7.H., Table 9.7.I., Table 9.8.A., Table 
9.7.Z.a., 9.7.Z.b., Table 9.7.AA.a., 
9.7.AA.b., and 9.7.AA.c.,  at a pressure 
as required to satisfy 6.9 bar at the 
most remote Hose reel valve. 

v.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 

60 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, direct 
breeching inlet and instantaneous re-
filling arrangement. 

 

3.  IF TOTAL FLOOR AREA IS  BETWEEN                    

901 m2—3600 m2   

 
i.  Dry Type Sprinklers shall be provided 
throughout the facility as per                 
Section 3.6. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be 
as per storage height and storage ar-
rangement, in accordance with  Table 
9.7.H., Table 9.7.I., Table 9.8.A., Ta-
ble 9.7.Z.a., 9.7.Z.b., Table 9.7.AA.a., 
9.7.AA.b., and 9.7.AA.c.,  

iii. Hose Reel System shall be provided 
throughout the building as per Sec-
tion 3.3. Dry landing valves shall not 
be required. 

 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 739 of 1348COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

 
4.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR BUILT

-UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 m2   

 
vi.  The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be as per storage height and storage 
arrangement, in accordance Table 
9.7.H., Table 9.7.I., Table 9.8.A., Table 
9.7.Z.a., 9.7.Z.b., Table 9.7.AA.a., 
9.7.AA.b., and 9.7.AA.c., .at a pres-
sure as required to satisfy 6.9 bar at 
the most remote Hydrant  valve. 

vii.  The water tank shall have a capacity 
of 60 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, direct 
breeching inlet and instantaneous re-
filling arrangement. 

 
4.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR 
BUILT-UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 
3600 m2   

 
i.  Dry Type Sprinklers shall be provid-

ed throughout the facility as per            
Section 3.6. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be 

as per storage height and storage 
arrangement, in accordance Table 
9.7.H., Table 9.7.I., Table 9.8.A., 
Table 9.7.Z.a., 9.7.Z.b., Table 
9.7.AA.a., 9.7.AA.b., and 9.7.AA.c.,  
iii. Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided 

as per Section 3.11., in a loop to 
cover the entire facility.  

iv. Hose Reel System shall be provided 
throughout the building as per Sec-
tion 3.3.  

v.  A dry riser and wet riser System shall 

not be required. 

 

Table 9.27.: Storage, Warehouse and Industrial Fire Protection Systems 

OCCUPANCY 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

P. COLD              

STORAGE 

 
(STORAGE            
FACILITIES WITH 
BELOW 40C       
TEMPERATURES) 
 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 740 of 1348 

Table 9.27.: Storage, Warehouse and Industrial Fire Protection Systems 

OCCUPANCY  SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

1.  GROUP I AIRCRAFT HANGERS       

1.  GROUP I AIRCRAFT HANGERS            

Q. AIRCRAFT 
HANGERS 

 
 

(Access door height over 8.5 m/A sin-
gle fire area is in excess of 3716 m2) 

 
 
xii.   The capacity of the fire pump set 

shall be 3000 gpm at a pressure as 
required to satisfy 6.9 bar at the 
most remote yard hydrant outlet 
valve. However, the fire pump ca-
pacity might increase depending on 
the zone and fire area considerations 
which are dependent on the aircraft 
size. 

xiii.  The water tank shall have a capacity 

of 60 minutes of operation, com-
plete with low water level detection 
and instantaneous refilling arrange-
ment. 

xiv.  The foam concentrate shall be for a 

minimum of 10 minute duration. 

(Access door height over 8.5 m/A sin-
gle fire area is in excess of 3716 m2) 

 
i.  A foam water deluge system shall be 
provided for the hanger as per          
Section 3.9 and Table 9.11. 

ii.  The foam discharge density shall be a 

minimum of 0.16 gpm/ft2 

iii.  The area of operation under a single 
foam water deluge system shall not 
exceed 1394 m2 (15,000ft2). 

iv.  The maximum distance between 

v. 

sprinklers/open discharge devices ei-
ther on branch line or between branch 
line shall not exceed 3.7 m. 
If the open door of the hanger inter-
feres in the intended discharge 
pattern, additional sprinkler/open dis-
charge devices heads shall be installed 
near the door. 

vi.  Sprinklers/open discharge devices of 
different orifice sizes and plates shall 
not be used. 

vii.  A foam water hand hose system shall 
be installed throughout the hanger as 
per Table 9.11.13. with design densi-
ties as appropriate as per Table 
9.11.C. 

viii. Each hand hose connection shall be a 
minimum of 38 mm (11∕2 in.) in size 
and fitted with a control valve. The 
hose shall be of a diameter to provide 
a minimum flow of 60 gpm. 

ix.  Standard Sprinklers shall be provided 
at office, tool rooms and non-service 
and non aircraft storage area as per             
Section 3.5. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

x.  Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided 

as per Section 3.11., in a loop to cover 
the entire hanger or group of hangers.  

xi.  A dry riser, wet riser and hose Reel 

system shall not be required. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 741 of 1348 

 

Table 9.27.: Storage, Warehouse and Industrial Fire Protection Systems 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET 
AND FIRE WATER TANK CA-
PACITIES 

2.  GROUP II AND III AIRCRAFT HANGERS  (Access 

2.  GROUP II AND III AIRCRAFT 

OCCUPAN-
CY 

Q. AIRCRAFT 
HANGERS 

 
 

door height is 8.5 m or less and A single fire 
area is below 3716 m2) AND PAINT HANGERS 

 
i.  The foam water deluge system shall be provid-
ed for the hanger as per Section 3.9 and Table 
9.11. A supplementary system should also be 
provided under wings in accordance with NFPA 
409. 

ii.  The foam discharge density shall be minimum 

of 0.17 gpm/ft2 

iii. Area of operation under a single foam water 

deluge system shall not exceed 465 m2 
(5,000ft2). 

iv. The maximum distance between sprinklers/

open discharge devices either on branch line or 
between branch line shall not exceed 3.7 m. 

v.  If open door of the hanger interferes in the in-
tended discharge pattern, additional sprinkler/
open discharge devices heads shall be installed 
near the door. 

vi. Sprinklers/open discharge devices of different 

orifice sizes and plates shall not be used. 

vii.  A foam water hand hose system shall be in-
stalled throughout the hanger as per Table 
9.11.13. with design densities as appropriate as 
per Table 9.11.C. 

viii.Each hand hose connection shall be a mini-

mum of 38 mm (11∕2 in.) in size and fitted with 
a control valve. The hose shall be of a diameter 
to provide a minimum flow of 60 gpm. 

ix. Standard Sprinklers shall be provided at office, 

tool rooms and non-service and non aircraft 
storage area as per  Section 3.5. 

x.  Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided as per         

Section 3.11., in a loop to cover the entire 
hanger or group of hangers.  

xi. A dry riser, wet riser and hose Reel system shall 

not be required. 

 
3.  GROUP IV AIRCRAFT HANGERS (Membrane 
covered steel structure) AND UNFUELED AIR-
CRAFT HANGERS 

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided throughout the 

facility as per  Section 3.5. 

ii.  The design density shall be a minimum of 0.17 

gpm over the operating area of 465 m2 
(5,000ft2). 

iii. Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided as per                

HANGERS  (Access door height is 
8.5 m or less and A single fire 
area is below 3716 m2) AND 
PAINT HANGERS 

 
xii.   The capacity of the fire pump 

set shall be 1500 gpm at a pres-
sure as required to satisfy 6.9 
bar at the most remote Yard 
hydrant outlet valve. However, 
the fire pump capacity might 
increase depending on the sim-
ultaneously activated zones  
and fire area considerations 
which are dependent on the 
aircraft size. 

xiii.  The water tank shall have a ca-
pacity of 60 minutes of opera-
tion, complete with low water 
level detection, direct breech-
ing inlet and instantaneous re-
filling arrangement. 

xiv. The foam concentrate shall be 

for a minimum of 10 minute 
duration. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.  GROUP IV AIRCRAFT HANGERS 
(Membrane covered steel struc-
ture) AND UNFUELED AIRCRAFT 
HANGERS 

 
v.   The capacity of the fire pump set 

shall be 1500 gpm at a pressure 
as required to satisfy 6.9 bar at 
the most remote Yard hydrant 
outlet valve. However, fire pump 
capacity might increase depend-
ing on the might increase de-
pending on the simultaneously 
activated zones and fire area con-
siderations which are dependent 
on the aircraft size 

Section 3.11., in a loop to cover the entire 
hanger or group of hangers.  

iv. A dry riser, wet riser and hose Reel system shall 

not be required. 

 

vi.  The water tank shall have a ca-
pacity of 60 minutes of opera-
tion, complete with low water 
level detection, direct breeching 
inlet and instantaneous refilling 
arrangement. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 742 of 1348 

 

Table 9.27.: Storage, Warehouse and Industrial Fire Protection Systems 

OCCUPANCY  SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

throughout the building as per Section 3.3. 

 
i.  Hose Reel System shall be provided 

1.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP FLOOR AREA OF THE 
COMPARTMENT IS LESS THAN  230 m2   

R. WAREHOUSE 
FOR INDOOR 
STORAGE OF 
FLAMMABLE 
AND COM-
BUSTIBLE 
 
LIQUIDS 
 
 
AND                    
 
AEROSOLS 
 
2.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP FLOOR AREA OF THE 

ii.  Dry landing valves and risers shall not be 

required. 

 
 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

1.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP FLOOR AREA OF 

THE COMPARTMENT IS LESS THAN 230 
m2   

 
ii.  The fire pump capacity shall be 50 gpm 

at pressure of 4.5 bar available at the 
most remote hose reel valve. 

iii.  The water tank shall have capacity of 

45 minutes of operation, complete with 
low water level detection and instanta-
neous refilling arrangement. 

 
2.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP FLOOR AREA OF 
THE COMPARTMENT IS 231 m2—900 
m2  

 
iv. The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be as per storage configuration and 
storage arrangement, in accordance 
with 9.7.HH. 9.7.II. 9.7.JJ. and 9.11.B., 
at a pressure as required to satisfy 4.5 
bar at the most remote Hose reel valve. 
v.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 

120 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, direct 
breeching inlet and instantaneous re-
filling arrangement. 

vi.  The foam solution reserve shall be for 

15 minutes operation. 

 
3.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP FLOOR AREA IS         

901 m2 - 3600 m2   

 
iv. The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be as per storage configuration and 
storage arrangement, in accordance 
with 9.7.HH. 9.7.II. 9.7.JJ. 9.11.B., at a 
pressure as required to satisfy 6.9 bar 
at the most remote hose reel valve. 

v.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 

120 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, direct 
breeching inlet and instantaneous re-
filling arrangement. 

vi.  The foam solution reserve shall be for 

15 minutes operation. 

 
4.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR BUILT-

UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 m2   

 
vi.   The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be as per storage configuration and 
storage arrangement, in accordance 
with 9.7.HH. 9.7.II. 9.7.JJ. 9.11.B., at a 
pressure as required to satisfy 6.9 bar 
at the most remote Hydrant Valve. 

vii.   The water tank shall have a capacity 

of 120 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, direct 
breeching inlet and instantaneous re-
filling arrangement. 

viii.  The foam solution reserve shall be for 

15 minutes operation. 

COMPARTMENT IS                                     
231 m2—900 m2  

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided throughout 
the facility as per Section 3.5. or Foam 
Sprinklers shall be provided throughout as 
per Section 3.9. 

ii.  The design criteria shall be as per storage 

height and storage arrangement, in ac-
cordance with Table 9.7.HH, 9.7.II, 9.7.JJ, 
9.11.B, and in-rack arrangement as per 
Table 9.7.KK  

iii. Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 3.3. 
Dry landing valves shall not be required. 

 
 
3.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP FLOOR AREA IS                      

901 m2 - 3600 m2   

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided throughout 

the facility as per Section 3.5. or foam 
sprinkler shall be provided throughout as 
per Section 3.9. 

ii.  The design criteria shall be as per storage 

height and storage arrangement, in ac-
cordance with Table 9.7.HH, 9.7.II, 9.7.JJ, 
9.11.B., and in-rack arrangement as per 
Table 9.7.KK  

iii. Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 3.3. 
Dry landing valves shall not be required. 

 
 

4.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR BUILT-UP 

AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 m2   

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided throughout 
the facility as per Section 3.5. or Foam 
Sprinkler shall be provided throughout as 
per Section 3.9. 

ii.  The design criteria shall be as per storage 

height and storage arrangement, in ac-
cordance with Table 9.7.HH, 9.7.II, 9.7.JJ, 
9.11.B., 9. and in-rack arrangement as per 
Table 9.7.KK 

iii. Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided as per 
Section 3.11., in a loop to cover the entire 
facility. Where foam sprinklers are provid-
ed, hydrant system shall also incorporate 
foam discharge.  

 

iv. Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 3.3.  

v.  A dry riser and wet riser System shall not 

be required. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 743 of 1348 

 

Table 9.27.: Storage, Warehouse and Industrial Fire Protection Systems 

OCCUPANCY  SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

S. INDUSTRIAL 
OCCUPANCY 
INVOLVING 
PROCESSES, 
ACTIVITIES 
THAT                    
HANDLE 
FLAMMABLE 
AND COM-
BUSTIBLE 
LIQUIDS 
(EXCEPT 
HANGER) 

1.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP FLOOR AREA OF 
THE COMPARTMENT IS LESS THAN 
230 m2   

 
i.  Hose Reel System shall be provided 
throughout the building as per Sec-
tion 3.2. and Section 3.3. 

ii.  Dry landing valves and risers shall not 

be required. 

 
 
2.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP FLOOR AREA OF 

1.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP FLOOR AREA OF THE 
COMPARTMENT IS LESS THAN 230 m2   

 
iii. The fire pump capacity shall be 50 gpm 
at a pressure of 4.5 bar available at the 
remote Hose reel valve. 

iv.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 
45 minutes of operation, complete with 
low water level detection and instanta-
neous refilling arrangement. 

 
2.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP FLOOR AREA OF THE 

THE COMPARTMENT IS                             
 
230 m2—900 m2  
iv. The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

COMPARTMENT IS 230 m2—900 m2  

 
i.  Foam Sprinklers shall be provided 

throughout the facility as per Section 
3.9. 

ii.  The foam sprinkler Design criteria 
shall be as per as per Table 9.11.C. 
iii. Hose Reel System shall be provided 
throughout the building as per Sec-
tion 3.3. Hose system shall also incor-
porate the foam application. Dry 
landing valves shall not be required. 

be as per 9.11.C. at pressure as required 
to satisfy 4.5 bar at the most remote 
Hose reel valve. 

v.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 

120 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, direct 
breeching inlet and instantaneous refill-
ing arrangement. 

vi. The foam solution reserve shall be for 15 

minutes operation. 

 
 
3.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP FLOOR AREA IS                      

 
 
3.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP FLOOR AREA IS         

 
 

 

901 m2 - 3600 m2   

 
iv. The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be as per 9.11.C. at a pressure as re-
quired to satisfy 6.9 bar at the most re-
mote hose reel valve. 

v.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 

120 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, direct 
breeching inlet and instantaneous refill-
ing arrangement. 

vi.  The foam solution reserve shall be for a 

15 minutes operation. 

 
4.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR BUILT-

UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 m2   

 
 
vi.   The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be as per 9.11.C. at pressure as re-
quired to satisfy 6.9 bar at the most 
remote hydrant valve. 

vii.   The water tank shall have capacity of 

120 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, direct 
breeching inlet and instantaneous refill-
ing arrangement. 

viii.  The foam solution reserve shall be for 

15 minutes operation. 

901 m2 - 3600 m2   

 
i.  Foam Sprinklers shall be provided 

throughout the facility as per Section 
3.9. 

ii.  The foam sprinkler Design criteria 
shall be as per as per Table 9.11.C. 
iii. Hose Reel System shall be provided 
throughout the building as per Sec-
tion 3.3. The hose system shall also 
incorporate foam application. Dry 
landing valves shall not be required. 

 
 

4.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR 
BUILT-UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 
3600 m2   

 
i.  Foam Sprinklers shall be provided 

throughout the facility as per Section 
3.9. 

ii.  The foam sprinkler Design criteria 

shall be as per as per Table 9.11.C.  
iii. Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided 
as per Section 3.11., in a loop to cov-
er the entire facility. Where foam 
sprinklers are provided, hydrant sys-
tem shall also incorporate foam dis-
charge. 

iv. Hose Reel System shall be provided 
throughout the building as per Sec-
tion 3.3.  

v.  A dry riser and wet riser System shall 

not be required. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 744 of 1348 

 

Table 9.27.: Storage, Warehouse and Industrial Fire Protection Systems 

PREDOMINANT        
OCCUPANCY 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

1.  IF THE STORAGE AREA IS LESS THAN 
230 m2 AND CAPACITY OF FLAMMA-
BLE, COMSBUTIBLE LIQUID STORAGE 
TANK IS LESS THAN 190 m3  

1.  IF THE STORAGE AREA IS LESS THAN 
230 m2 AND CAPACITY OF FLAMMA-
BLE, COMSBUTIBLE LIQUID STOR-
AGE TANK IS LESS THAN 190 m3  

T. STORAGE OF 

FLAMMABLE 
AND            
COMBUSTIBLE         
LIQUIDS IN 
ABOVE 
GROUND     
STORAGE 
TANKS 

 
iv. The fire pump capacity shall be 100 
gpm at a pressure of 4.5 bar availa-
ble at the remote Hose reel valve. 

v.  The water tank shall have a capacity 

of 60 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection and 
instantaneous refilling arrangement. 

vi. The foam reserve shall be for a 15 

minutes  operation. 

 
 
2.  IF THE STORAGE AREA IS MORE 
THAN 230 m2 OR CAPACITY OF 
FLAMMABLE, COMSBUTIBLE LIQUID 
STORAGE TANK IS MORE THAN         
190 m3  

 
 
vii. The capacity of the fire pump set 

and foam reserve shall be suitable 
for a single largest hazard. Addition-
al capacity of 1000 gpm shall be 
added for hose stream demand. 

viii. The water tank shall have a capacity 

of 120 minutes of operation, com-
plete with low water level detec-
tion, direct breeching inlet and in-
stantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 
 
 

 
i.  Hose Reel System shall be provided 
throughout the building as per Sec-
tion 3.3. 

ii.  The hose stations shall incorporate 

the foam application. 

iii. Dry landing valves and risers shall not 

be required. 

 
 
 
 
2.  IF THE STORAGE AREA IS MORE 
THAN 230 m2 OR CAPACITY OF 
FLAMMABLE, COMSBUTIBLE LIQUID 
STORAGE TANK IS MORE THAN         
190 m3  

 
i.  Aboveground storage tank storing 
class I or class II liquids shall be pro-
tected with fixed low expansion foam 
system in accordance with             
Section 3.9., and Table 9.11.A.,  
9.11.E., and 9.11.F. (as applicable). 
ii.  The tanks or section of the tanks ex-

posed to heat radiation of greater 
than 12.2 Kw/m2 due to fire in adja-
cent tanks or facility, shall be provid-
ed cooling  with deluge water spray 
system in accordance with Section 
3.8., and Table 9.10.D.  

iii. Yard hydrant shall be provided as per 
Section 3.11, in loop to cover the en-
tire facility. Hydrant shall incorporate 
option for foam application as per 
Section 3.9 and Table 9.11.C., Table 
9.11.D., 9.11.G., and 9.11.H. (as ap-
plicable). 

iv. Hose Reel System shall be provided 
throughout the building as per Sec-
tion 3.3. 

v.  The hose stations shall incorporate 

the foam application. 

vi. Dry landing valves and risers shall not 

be required. 

 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 745 of 1348 

 

Table 9.27.: Storage, Warehouse and Industrial Fire Protection Systems 

OCCUPANCY  SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

U. OPEN YARD 

STORAGE 
OF                   
MATERIALS 
OTHER 
THAN 
FLAMMA-
BLE AND 
COMBUS-
TIBLE               
MATERIALS 

 
 

1.  IF TOTAL OPEN STORAGE YARD IS 
LESS THAN 2000 m2  AND STORING 
LIGHT HAZARD MATERIALS AS PER 
SECTION 1.1.23., AND TABLE 9.1. 

 
i.  Fire extinguishers as per Chapter 4. 
 
 
2.  IF TOTAL OPEN STORAGE YARD IS 

MORE THAN 2000 m2  AND STORING 
LIGHT HAZARD MATERIALS AS PER 
SECTION 1.1.23., AND TABLE 9.1. 

 
i.  Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per      
Section 3.3. Dry landing valves are 
not required. 

ii.  Equipment and cabinet shall be ap-

proved for outdoor door application. 

 
 
 
3.  IF TOTAL OPEN STORAGE YARD IS 

MORE THAN 1000 m2  AND STORING 
MATERIALS OTHER THAN LIGHT 
HAZARD MATERIALS AS PER         
SECTION 1.1.23., AND TABLE 9.1. 

 
i.  Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per       
Section 3.3. Dry landing valves are 
not required. 

ii.  The equipment and cabinet shall be 
approved for outdoor door applica-
tion. 

 
 
 
4.  IF TOTAL OPEN STORAGE YARD IS 

MORE THAN 3600 m2  AND STORING 
ANY MATERIALS, OTHER THAN 
FLAMMABLE AND COMBUSTIBLE 
MATERIALS 

 
i.  Yard hydrant shall be provided as per 
Section 3.11, in loop to cover the en-
tire facility.  

ii.  Trolley type foam extinguishers shall 

be provided for the outdoor emer-
gencies. 

iii. The equipment and cabinet shall be 
approved for outdoor door applica-
tion. 

iv. Hose reel system or landing valves 

shall not be required. 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.  IF TOTAL OPEN STORAGE YARD IS 

MORE THAN 2000 m2  AND STORING 
LIGHT HAZARD MATERIALS AS PER   
SECTION 1.1.23., AND TABLE 9.1. 

 
iii.  The fire pump capacity shall be 50 gpm 
at a pressure of 4.5 bar available at the 
remote Hose reel valve. 

iv.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 
30 minutes of operation, complete with 
low water level detection and instanta-
neous refilling arrangement. 

 
 
3.  IF TOTAL OPEN STORAGE YARD IS 

MORE THAN 1000 m2  AND STORING 
MATERIALS OTHER THAN LIGHT HAZ-
ARD MATERIALS AS PER                       
SECTION 1.1.23., AND TABLE 9.1. 

 
iii. The fire pump capacity shall be 50 gpm 
at a pressure of 4.5 bar available at the 
remote Hose reel valve. 

iv.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 
30 minutes of operation, complete with 
low water level detection and instanta-
neous refilling arrangement. 

 
 
 
4.  IF TOTAL OPEN STORAGE YARD IS 

MORE THAN 3600 m2  AND STORING 
ANY MATERIALS, OTHER THAN FLAM-
MABLE AND COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS 

 
v. The fire pump capacity shall be 500 gpm 
at a pressure of 6.9 bar available at the 
most remote hydrant valve. 

vi.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 
60 minutes of operation, complete with 
low water level detection, direct breech-
ing inlet and instantaneous refilling ar-
rangement. 

 
 
 

V. NURSERIES 

i.  Fire extinguishers as per Chapter 4. 

 

(PLANTS 
AND           
VEGETA-
TION) 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 746 of 1348 

4.12.  Tunnel Fire Protection Systems 

 
4.12.1.  Tunnel shall be provided with Fire protection Systems in compliance with Table 

9.28. and Auxiliary Rooms fire protection systems, if any, as per Table 9.30.  

Table 9.28.: Tunnel Fire Protection Systems 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS  COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND FIRE WATER 

TANK CAPACITIES 

 

OCCUPAN-
CY 

A. CABLE     
TUNNELS 

 
 

1.  IF LENGTH OF THE CABLE 
TUNNEL IS LESS THAN 60 
m 

 
i.  An automatic Deluge Wa-

1.  IF LENGTH OF THE TUNNEL IS LESS THAN 60 m 
 
iii.   The capacity of the fire pump set shall be sufficient 

to satisfy minimum of 2 adjacent deluge water 
spray system zones at a pressure as required to 
satisfy 4.5 bar at the most remote Hose reel outlet 
valve. 

iv.   Where water mist is provided, the capacity of the 
fire pump set for water mist system shall be as per 
the manufacturer’s specifications and approved 
design and installation guideline. 

v.    The water tank shall have a capacity of 60 minutes 
of operation, complete with low water level detec-
tion and instantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 
 
2.  IF LENGTH OF THE TUNNEL IS MORE THAN 60 m 
 
iii.   The capacity of the fire pump set shall be sufficient 

to satisfy minimum of 2 adjacent deluge water 
spray system zones at a pressure as required to 
satisfy 6.9 bar at the most remote landing valve. 

iv.   Where water mist is provided, the capacity of the 
fire pump set for water mist system shall be as per 
the manufacturer’s specifications and approved 
design and installation guideline. 

v.   The water tank shall have a capacity of 60 minutes 
of operation, complete with low water level detec-
tion, direct breeching inlet and instantaneous refill-
ing arrangement. 

ter Spray System as per 
Section 3.8.  OR Automatic 
Water Mist System, as per 
Section 3.10, shall be pro-
vided. 

ii.  A dry riser + Hose Reel Sys-

tem shall be provided at 
the Tunnel entry points, as 
per Section 3.2 and  Sec-
tion 3.3. 

 
2.  IF LENGTH OF THE TUNNEL 

IS MORE THAN 60 m 

 
i.  An automatic Deluge Wa-

ter Spray as per Section 
3.8.  OR Automatic Water 
Mist System, as per Section 
3.10, shall be provided. 

ii.  A wet riser System shall be 

provided throughout the 
building as per Section 3.4. 

 
 
 

 

B. ROAD/RAIL 

TUNNELS 

1.  IF LENGTH OF THE TUNNEL 

IS LESS THAN 90 M 

 
i.  None 
 
 
2.  IF LENGTH OF THE TUNNEL 

IS 90 m—1000 m 

 
i.  A wet riser System shall be 

provided throughout the 
building as per Section 3.4. 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
2. IF LENGTH OF THE TUNNEL IS 90 m—1000 m 
 
 
ii.   The capacity of the fire pump set shall be 750 gpm 

at a pressure as required to satisfy 6.9 bar at the 
most remote Landing valve. 

iii.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 60 minutes 
of operation, complete with low water level detec-
tion, direct breeching inlet and instantaneous refill-
ing arrangement. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 747 of 1348 

Table 9.28.: Tunnel Fire Protection Systems 

 OCCUPANCY 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND FIRE 
WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

3.  IF LENGTH OF THE TUNNEL IS                

3.  IF LENGTH OF THE TUNNEL IS                

MORE THAN 1000 m 

 
i.  An automatic deluge Water 
Spray system as per Section 
3.8.  OR an automatic water 
mist system, as per Section 
3.10, shall be provided. 

ii.  A Class III wet riser System shall 

be provided throughout the 
building as per Section 3.4. 

iii. Breeching inlets shall be pro-
vided at both openings of the 
tunnel. 

MORE THAN 1000 m 

 
iii.   The capacity of the fire pump set shall be 
sufficient to satisfy minimum of 2 adjacent 
deluge water spray system zones at a 
pressure as required to satisfy 6.9 bar at 
the most remote landing valve. 

iv.   Where water mist is provided, the capaci-
ty of the fire pump set for water mist sys-
tem shall be for a period of 1 hour and 
shall be as per the manufacturer’s specifi-
cations and approved design and installa-
tion guideline. 

v.    The water tank shall have a capacity of 60 
minutes of operation, complete with low 
water level detection and instantaneous 
refilling arrangement. 

B. ROAD/RAIL 

TUNNELS 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 748 of 1348 

4.13.  Various Locations and Extension of Fire Protection Systems 

 
4.13.1.  Various locations in a building shall be protected with Automatic Sprinkler Systems 
as per Table 9.29.  The building sprinkler system shall be extended to comply with 
requirements of Table 9.29. 

Table 9.29.: Various Locations and Extension of Fire Protection Systems 

LOCATION/     
HAZARD 

A. ATRIUMS 
 

B. BALCONIES 

C. RAIN SCREEN/ 

GLAZING 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

Section 3.5. 

Section 3.5. 

i.  Atriums should be provided with automatic sprinkler system as per                

ii.  Sprinkler heads should be installed immediately adjacent to atrium opening. 

And non-combustible material draft stops of 450 mm deep shall be provided.  

i.  Exterior balconies shall be provided with automatic sprinkler system as per 

ii.  Sidewall Sprinkler heads or pendent sprinklers shall be installed at exterior 

balconies of such buildings where sprinkler protection is required. 

iii. Balcony sprinkler coverage shall not exceed 12 m2  per sprinkler head. 
iv. Sprinkler temperature rating shall be 790C. 

i.  Glazing of the building envelope shall be protected with sprinkler system as 

per Section 3.5. 

ii.  Sprinkler protection shall be from the interior of the building by extending 
sprinkler system on ceiling with window type pendent or on walls with win-
dow type side wall sprinklers, installed such that discharge pattern covers the 
interior of the glazing to provide draft curtain effect. 

D. STAIRS 

i.  The stair top (Top of the shaft) and first accessible landing above the bottom 

of the shaft shall be provided with sprinkler system as per Section 3.5. 

E. ELEVATOR SHAFT 

i.  The sidewall spray sprinklers in accordance with Section 3.5. shall be installed 
at the bottom of each elevator hoistway (shaft) not more than 600 mm above 
the floor of the pit. 

F. ABOVE FALSE 

CEILING 

G. BATHROOMS 

i.  Sprinklers shall not be required. However, compartmentation and fire stop-

ping shall be considered at regular intervals. 

ii.  In bathrooms above false ceiling spaces where heaters are installed, such 

above false ceiling spaces shall be protected with sprinklers as per Section 3.5. 

i.  In bathrooms above false ceiling spaces where heaters are installed, such 

above false ceiling spaces shall be protected with sprinklers as per Section 3.5. 
ii.  Public washrooms and bathrooms shall be provided with a sprinkler system as 

iii. Residential, Hotel and Apartment washrooms and bathrooms shall not require 

per Section 3.5.  

sprinkler protection. 

H. LAUNDRY/
STORAGE 

I. PANTRIES 

J. STAGES 

i.  Laundry and storage rooms of residential buildings, residential apartment 

buildings and hotel apartment buildings shall be provided with sprinkler sys-
tem as per Section 3.5. 

i.  Pantries in business occupancies and commercial buildings shall be provided 

with a sprinkler system as per Section 3.5. 

i.  Permanent stages in assembly occupancies shall be installed with a sprinkler 
system under the stages, dressing rooms, store rooms and workshops, in ac-
cordance with Section 3.5. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 749 of 1348 

LOCATION/ 
HAZARD 

K. ROOF 

L. GARBAGE 

CHUTE 

M. CEILINGS 

EXCEEDING 
10 M IN 
HEIGHT 

Table 9.29.: Various Locations and Extension of Fire Protection Systems 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

i.  Building roofs having LPG tanks, roof spaces used for restaurant seating, assembly 
and as sheesha bars shall be provided with a wet riser System as per Section 3.4. 
The building wet riser with hose reel shall be extended to such roofs. 

i.  A garbage chute shaft shall be provided with one sprinkler head at the top of the 

shaft, one sprinkler head at alternating floors and one sprinkler head at the lowest 
level, as per  Section 3.5. 

i.  Where building ceiling height exceeds 10 m in height, sprinklers shall be provided 

in accordance with Section 3.5 and Table 9.29.A. High Ceiling Sprinkler Protec-
tion. 

ii.  The sprinklers for high ceiling protection shall be extended coverage, 1600F (700c), 

listed and approved for such applications. 

iii. The requirements of Table 9.29.A. High Ceiling Sprinkler Protection, is a minimum 
guideline. Other design criteria recommended by approved and listed manufactur-
er’s detailed design guideline specifically for high ceiling sprinkler protection shall 
be permitted. 

Table 9.29.A.: High Ceiling Sprinkler Protection Design Criteria 

HAZARD 

CEILING HEIGHT 
10 m TO 13.5 m 

CEILING HEIGHT 
13.5 m TO 18 m 

CEILING HEIGHT 
18 m TO 30 m 

1.  LIGHT HAZARD  K-factor- K11.2 (K160) 

 
Min Pressure                                  
12 psi (0.8 bar) 
 
Min No of Sprinklers- 06 
 
Design Density  
gpm/ft2  (mm/m2) 
0.20 (8.0) 
 
Design area ft2  (m2) 
2500 (230) 
 
Pump Capacity 
Without hydrant-750 gpm 
With hydrants-1000 gpm 

K-factor- K11.2 (K160) 
 
Min Pressure                              
18 psi (1.2 bar) 
 
Min No of Sprinklers 04 
 
Design Density  
gpm/ft2  (mm/m2) 
0.20 (8.0) 
 
Design area ft2  (m2) 
2500 (230) 
 
Pump Capacity 
Without hydrant-750 gpm 
With hydrants-1000 gpm 

K-factor- K25.2 (K360) 
 
Min Pressure                                
7 psi (0.5 bar) 
 
Min No of Sprinklers 12 
 
Pump Capacity 
Without hydrant-           
1000 gpm 
With hydrants-1250 gpm 

K-factor- K11.2 (K160) 
K-factor- K11.2 (K160) 
 
 
Min Pressure                             
Min Pressure                                
12 psi (0.8 bar) 
18 psi (1.2 bar) 
 
 
Min No of Sprinklers 06 
Min No of Sprinklers 04 
 
 
Design Density  
Design Density  
gpm/ft2  (mm/m2) 
gpm/ft2  (mm/m2) 
0.20 (8.0) 
0.20 (8.0) 
 
 
Design area ft2  (m2) 
Design area ft2  (m2) 
2500 (230) 
2500 (230) 
 
 
Pump Capacity 
Pump Capacity 
Without hydrant-750 gpm 
Without hydrant-750 gpm 
With hydrants-1000 gpm 
With hydrants-1000 gpm 

K-factor- K25.2 (K360) 
 
Min Pressure                                 
7 psi (0.5 bar) 
 
Min No of Sprinklers 12 
 
Pump Capacity 
Without hydrant-           
1000 gpm 
With hydrants-1250 gpm 

2.  ORDINARY 

HAZARD 

 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 750 of 1348 

Table 9.29.A.: High Ceiling Sprinkler Protection Design Criteria 

HAZARD 

CEILING HEIGHT 
10 m TO 13.5 m 

CEILING HEIGHT 
13.5 m TO 18 m 

CEILING HEIGHT 
18 m TO 30 m 

3.  HIGH HAZARD  K-factor- K11.2 (K160) 

K-factor- K25.2 (K360) 
 
Min Pressure                          
7 psi (0.5 bar) 
 
Min No of Sprinklers 12 
 
Pump Capacity 
Without hydrant-           
1000 gpm 
With hydrants-1250 gpm 

K-factor- K25.2 (K360) 
 
Min Pressure                          
7 psi (0.5 bar) 
 
Min No of Sprinklers 12 
 
Pump Capacity 
Without hydrant-           
1000 gpm 
With hydrants-1250 gpm 

 
Min Pressure                                
12 psi (0.8 bar) 
 
Min No of Sprinklers 06 
 
Design Density  
gpm/ft2  (mm/m2) 
0.30 (12.0) 
 
Design area ft2  (m2) 
3600 (340) 
 
Pump Capacity 
Without hydrant-           
1000 gpm 
With hydrants-1250 gpm 

 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 751 of 1348 

4.14.  Auxiliary Rooms and Selection of Fire Protection Systems 

 
4.14.1.  Auxiliary rooms shall be protected with the options of Fire Protection Systems as 
per Table 9.30.  However, where any rooms and equipment are provided with 
fire protection systems as per Table 9.30., the designers shall first consider and 
consult the relevant Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) before designing and 
proposing such fire protection systems. 

Table 9.30.: Auxiliary Rooms Fire Protection Systems 

LOCATION /  HAZARD 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

A. ANESTHETIZING ROOMS  

B. BATTERY CHARGER ROOMS 

C. BMS ROOMS 

OR 

OR 

OR 

OR 

D. BATTERY ROOMS 

i.  None 

E. COMPUTER ROOMS 

F. CONTROL ROOMS/ FIRE     

COMMAND CENTERS 

i.  An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided as per Section 

3.5.                                                                                                        
OR 

ii.  A double interlocked Pre-action sprinkler system shall be pro-

vided as per Section 3.7. 

i.  Clean agent system shall be provided as per Section 3.14.        

ii.  A double interlocked Pre-action sprinkler system shall be pro-

vided as per Section 3.7. 

i.  Clean agent system shall be provided as per Section 3.14.        

ii.  A double interlocked Pre-action sprinkler system shall be pro-

vided as per Section 3.7. 

iii. BMS rooms which are less than 10 m2  in area and are not with 
critical building monitoring and management systems shall not 
be required to be protected. 

i.  Clean agent system shall be provided as per Section 3.14.        

ii.  A double interlocked pre-action sprinkler system shall be pro-
vided as per Section 3.7.                                                                   
OR 

iii. Computer rooms which are less than 10 m2  in area and are not 

with critical life or building monitoring and management sys-
tems shall not be required to be protected. 

i.  Clean agent system shall be provided as per Section 3.14.        

ii.  A double interlocked Pre-action sprinkler system shall be pro-
vided as per Section 3.7.                                                                   
OR 

iii. Rooms which are less than 10 m2  in area and are not with criti-
cal life or building monitoring and control systems shall not be 
required to be protected. 

iv. Rooms which are separated as part of separated service blocks 

and detached from the predominant occupancy, by a separa-
tion distance of 3 m, shall not be required to be protected. 

G. DIESEL GENERATOR ROOMS 

i.  Foam sprinkler system shall be provided as per Section 3.9.  
ii.  Diesel generator rooms which are separated as part of separat-
ed service blocks and detached from the predominant occupan-
cy, by a separation distance of 3 m, shall not be required to be 
protected. 

 
 

 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 752 of 1348 

4.14.  Auxiliary Rooms and Selection of Fire Protection Systems 

Table 9.30.: Auxiliary Rooms Fire Protection Systems 

LOCATION /  HAZARD 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

H. MAIN ELECTRICAL ROOMS                     

i.  Clean agent system shall be provided as per Section 3.14.        
ii.  Electrical rooms which are less than 10 m2  in area OR are locat-
ed on typical floors shall not be required to be protected. How-
ever, such typical floor electrical rooms shall be 1 hour fire rat-
ed enclosures and shall be limited to distribution boards and  
junction boxes and fully compliant to penetration fire stopping. 

iii. Electrical rooms which are separated as part of separated ser-

vice blocks and detached from the predominant occupancy, by 
a separation distance of 3 m, shall not be required to be pro-
tected. 

I. AHU ROOMS 

i.  An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided as per Section 

3.5.  

i.  Clean agent system shall be provided as per Section 3.14. 

Where louvers are provided for LV rooms protected with clean 
agent system, louvers shall be motorized and closed upon clean 
agent discharge to maintain room tightness.                                

ii.  Rooms which are separated as part of separated service blocks 

and detached from the predominant occupancy, by a separa-
tion distance of 3 m, shall not be required to be protected. 

iii. Rooms which are less than 10 m2  in area OR are located on typ-
ical floors shall not be required to be protected. However, such 
typical floor or podium floor rooms shall be 1 hour fire rated 
enclosures and shall be limited to distribution boards and  junc-
tion boxes and fully compliant to penetration fire stopping. 

 

i.  None, unless power utility company specifies. 
ii.  Where specified and required, A clean agent system shall be 

provided as per Section 3.14.                                                           
OR 

iii. Deluge Water Spray system shall be provided in accordance 

with Section 3.8.                                                                                          
OR 

iv. Water Mist system shall be provided in accordance with Section 

3.10.  

OR 

i.  A clean agent system shall be provided as per Section 3.14.     

ii.  Deluge Water Spray system shall be provided in accordance 

with Section 3.8.                                                                                          
OR 

iii. Water Mist system shall be provided in accordance with Section 

3.10.                                                                                                       
OR  

iv. Transformer Rooms shall be 2 hour fire rated enclosures with 
90 minutes fire doors or 90 minutes fire rated motorized lou-
vers, housing exclusively dry type electrical equipment and no 
other storage. 

v.  Private enclosed transformer rooms which are separated as 
part of separated service blocks and detached from the pre-
dominant occupancy, by a separation distance of 3 m, shall not 
be required to be protected. 

J. LV ROOMS AND MV ROOMS 

K.  TRANSFORMER ROOMS 

OWNED BY POWER UTILITY 
COMPANIES, ENCLOSED AND 
SITUATED IN  LOCATIONS 
OTHER THAN  SUBSTATIONS 

L.  TRANSFORMER ROOMS NOT 
OWNED BY POWER UTILITY 
COMPANIES, ENCLOSED AND 
SITUATED IN  LOCATIONS 
OTHER THAN  SUBSTATIONS 

 
 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 753 of 1348 

4.14.  Auxiliary Rooms and Selection of Fire Protection Systems 

Table 9.30.: Auxiliary Rooms Fire Protection Systems 

LOCATION /  HAZARD 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

M. LIFT MACHINE ROOMS 

i.  An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided as per Section 

ii.  Lift machine rooms which do not contain control equipment, 
mechanical equipment or spaces which serve ‘machine room 
less elevators’ shall not be required to be protected. 

N. MAIN TELEPHONE  ROOM                                  

i.  Clean agent system shall be provided as per Section 3.14.        

O. MAIN SERVER ROOMS                

P. RMU /IDF/ MDF/ CDF/MMR 

ROOMS 

Q. GSM ROOMS 

 
 
 

 

3.5.  

OR 

 

 

ii.  Telephone rooms which are less than 10 m2  in area or are locat-
ed on typical floors shall not be required to be protected. How-
ever, such typical floor telephone rooms shall be limited to dis-
tribution boards and  junction boxes and fully compliant pene-
tration fire stopping. 

iii. Telephone rooms which are separated as part of separated ser-

vice blocks and detached from the predominant occupancy, by a 
separation distance of 3 m, shall not be required to be protect-
ed. 

i.  Clean agent system shall be provided as per Section 3.14. 
ii.  Server rooms which are less than 10 m2  in area or are located 

on typical floors shall not be required to be protected. However, 
such typical floor server rooms shall be compartmented with 
fully compliant penetration fire stopping systems. 

iii. Server cabinets which are exposed to occupied rooms shall not 

be required to be protected, provided the room is provided with 
automatic sprinkler system. 

iv. Server rooms which are separated as part of separated service 

blocks and detached from the predominant occupancy, by a 
separation distance of 3 m, shall not be required to be protect-
ed. 

i.  Clean agent system shall be provided as per Section 3.14.  
ii.  Rooms which are less than 10 m2  in area or are located on typi-
cal floors shall not be required to be protected. However, such 
typical floor rooms shall be compartmented with fully compliant 
fire stopping systems. 

iii. Rooms which are separated as part of separated service blocks 

and detached from the predominant occupancy, by a separation 
distance of 3 m, shall not be required to be protected. 

 

i.  Clean agent system shall be provided as per Section 3.14.  
ii.  Rooms which are less than 10 m2  in area or are located on typi-
cal floors shall not be required to be protected. However, such 
typical floor rooms shall be compartmented with fully compliant 
fire stopping systems. 

iii. Rooms which are separated as part of separated service blocks 

and detached from the predominant occupancy, by a separation 
distance of 3 m, shall not be required to be protected. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 754 of 1348 

4.14.  Auxiliary Rooms and Selection of Fire Protection Systems 

Table 9.30.: Auxiliary Rooms Fire Protection Systems 

LOCATION /  HAZARD 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

R. OPERATION THEATERS 

S. MRI/SCANNING ROOMS 

i.  A double interlocked pre-action sprinkler system shall be provid-

ed as per Section 3.7. 

     OR 
ii.  Rooms shall be 2 hour fire rated enclosures with 90 minutes fire 
doors, housing exclusively dry type medical and electrical equip-
ment and no other storage. 

i.  An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided as per                          

Section 3.5.                                                                                          
OR 

ii.  A double interlocked pre-action sprinkler system shall be provid-

ed as per  Section 3.7.                                                                        
OR 

iii. Rooms shall be 2 hour fire rated enclosures with 90 minutes fire 
doors, housing exclusively dry type medical and electrical equip-
ment and no other storage. 

T. RECORDS ROOM                                        

i.  An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided as per                     

Section 3.5.                                                                                          
OR 

ii.  A double interlocked pre-action sprinkler system shall be provid-

ed as per Section 3.7.                                                                         
OR 

iii. Clean agent system shall be provided as per Section 3.14.  

U. UPS Rooms                                              

i.  Clean agent system shall be provided as per Section 3.14.        

OR 

ii.  A double interlocked Pre-action sprinkler system shall be provid-

ed as per Section 3.7.                                                                         
OR 

iii. Rooms shall be 2 hour fire rated enclosures with 90 minutes fire 
doors, housing exclusively dry type battery, dry electrical equip-
ment and no other storage. 

i.  Dry type sprinklers or dry preaction system shall be provided. 
ii.  Rooms which are less than 20 m2  in area need not be protected. 
However, such rooms shall be compartmented with fully compli-
ant penetration fire stopping systems. 

iii. Modular type cold rooms which are exposed to occupied rooms 
shall not be required to be protected, provided the room is pro-
vided with automatic sprinkler system. 

iv. Rooms which are separated as part of separated service blocks 

and detached from the predominant occupancy, by a separation 
distance of 3 m, shall not be required to be protected. 

V. COLD/FREEZER ROOMS 

 
 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 755 of 1348 

4.15.  Equipment and Selection of Fire Protection Systems 

 
4.15.1.  The equipment and machinery shall be protected with options of Fire Protection 

Systems as per Table 9.31.   

Table 9.31.: Equipment Fire Protection Systems 

EQUIPMENT/     HAZARD 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

A. KITCHEN HOOD  

B. LPG TANKS 

i.  An automatic Wet Chemical system shall be provided as per Sec-

tion 3.12. for commercial kitchens having 3 or more burners. 

ii.  Grease filters shall be installed for the kitchen hood. 

i.  Where building is sprinklered, and LPG tanks are installed above-

ground or on roofs or podiums, an automatic Water Deluge Spray 
System shall be provided as per Section 3.8. 

ii.  Where building is not sprinklered and LPG tanks are installed 

aboveground or on roofs or podiums, a dry type deluge spray sys-
tem shall be provided with breeching inlet. 

iii. Where LPG tanks are installed aboveground, no protection shall 
be required, unless the proximity of such tanks is more than 6 m 
from any point of structure. 

C. FLAMMABLE  LIQUID TANKS 

i.  An automatic foam systems as appropriate as per Section 3.9., 

shall be provided. Refer to Chapter 13. Flammable Liquids. 

D. CABLE SPREAD  AREAS 

E. DIESEL GENERATOR ROOM 

i.  An automatic Water Deluge Spray System shall be provided as per 

Table 3.8.                                                                                                
OR 

ii.  An automatic Water Mist System shall be provided as per Table 

3.10.  

i.  Foam sprinkler system shall be provided as per Section 3.9. 
ii.  Diesel generator rooms which are separated as part of separated 
service blocks and detached from the predominant occupancy, by 
a separation distance of 3 m, shall not be required to be protect-
ed. 

F. BOILERS/BOILER ROOMS 

G. COOLING TOWERS 

i.  An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided as per Section 

3.5.  

i.  Where the cooling tower material is not tested and certified for 
non-combustibility, automatic Water Deluge Spray System shall 
be provided as per Table 3.8.  

H. TRANSFORMERS                              

i.  An automatic Water Deluge Spray System shall be provided as per 

Table 3.8.  

i.  Suppression Systems shall be based on comprehensive Risk as-

sessment and shall be proposed and stamped by the Civil Defence 
approved House of Expertise. Refer to Chapter 13. Flammable 
Liquids. 

i.  Suppression Systems shall be based on comprehensive Risk as-

sessment and shall be proposed and stamped by the Civil Defence 
approved House of Expertise. Refer to Chapter 13. Flammable 
Liquids and Chapter 9. Fire Protection Systems. 

—OIL FILLED 

I. BULK OIL STORAGE 

J. BULK  FLAMMABLE LIQUID  

STORAGE 

 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 756 of 1348 

Table 9.31.: Equipment Fire Protection Systems 

EQUIPMENT/     HAZARD 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

K. BULK FLAMMABLE GAS        

STORAGE 

i.  Suppression Systems shall be based on comprehensive Risk as-

sessment and shall be proposed and stamped by the Civil Defence 
approved House of Expertise. 

L. BULK FLAMMABLE SOLID 

STORAGE 

i.  Suppression Systems shall be based on a comprehensive Risk as-

sessment and shall be proposed and stamped by the Civil Defence 
approved House of Expertise. 

M. HIGH HAZARD LOGISTICS 

N. CHEMICAL  WAREHOUSES 

i.  Suppression Systems shall be based on a comprehensive Risk as-

sessment and shall be proposed and stamped by the Civil Defence 
approved House of Expertise. 

i.  Suppression Systems shall be based on a comprehensive Risk as-

sessment and shall be proposed and stamped by the Civil Defence 
approved House of Expertise. 

O. ARMS, AMMUNITION,              

EXPLOSIVES 

i.  Suppression Systems shall be based on a comprehensive Risk as-

sessment and shall be proposed and stamped by the Civil Defence 
approved House of Expertise. 

P. PROCESSING, GENERATING 

PLANTS 

 

i.  Suppression Systems shall be based on a comprehensive Risk as-

sessment and shall be proposed and stamped by the Civil Defence 
approved House of Expertise. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 757 of 1348 

5.  Design, Installation, Inspection and Maintenance of Fire 

Protection Systems 
 
5.1. Design/Specification and Submittals 
 

5.1.1.  Design, Specifications and Submittals to Civil Defence for approval shall be the 

main consultant’s responsibility. The consultant shall have competent and knowl-
edgeable personnel to understand the Civil Defence requirements and codes and 
standards. 

5.1.2. 

The design submittals shall be complete with system hydraulic calculations, design 
criteria, appropriate selection of types of systems and their components, in com-
pliance with this code. 

5.2. Installation 
 

5.2.1. 

5.2.2. 

5.2.3. 

The installation of Fire Protection Systems shall be carried out only by Civil Defence 
approved and licensed contractors. general contractors, MEP contractors and 
plumbing contractors shall not be allowed to install fire protection systems. 

The qualification and approval of the installation by Civil Defence is based on their 
training from the respective system manufacturers, their experience and their un-
derstanding of codes and standards and workmanship. 

Installation contractors shall apply to Civil Defence and secure passing marks in 
Civil Defence examination to gain the license and be qualified as “approved fire 
contractors”. 

5.2.4. 

The installation contractor shall not commence work on site without receiving the 
Civil Defence stamped and approved drawings from the Consultant. 

5.2.5. 

It is the contractors responsibility to adhere to consultant’s Civil Defence approved 
drawings and specifications. 

5.3. Inspection and Acceptance 
 

5.3.1. 

Inspection and acceptance shall be the main consultant’s responsibility. 

5.3.2. 

The main consultant shall inspect the contractor’s work during installations and 
ensure that all systems are installed, tested, commissioned and performing as per 
the Civil Defence approved drawings and their intended purpose. 

5.3.3. 

The consultant shall handover the system inspection and acceptance reports and 
the maintenance manuals to the owner. 

5.4. Inspection and Maintenance 
 

5.4.1. 

The building owner, his appointed representative and the facility management 

shall be responsible to ensure that all the Fire Protection Systems in the facility are 

inspected regularly, maintained and repaired to serve their intended purpose dur-

ing emergencies. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 758 of 1348 

5.5. Fire Pumps-acceptance test and maintenance 
 

Fire Pumps shall be inspected and maintained as per minimum guidelines in ac-
cordance with Table 9.32. However, detailed acceptance, inspection tests and 
maintenance shall be as per Manufacturer’s instruction manual, NFPA 20 and 
NFPA 25. 

5.5.1. 

 

Table 9.32.: Fire Pump  Testing, Inspection and Maintenance 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. ACCEPTANCE TEST  1.  FLUSHING 

 
i.  The suction piping shall be flushed prior to hydrostatic tests. 
ii.  Where the maximum flow available from the water supply cannot provide a 

flow of 150 percent of the rated flow of the pump, the flushing flow rate 
shall be the greater of 100 percent of the rated flow of the connected fire 
pump or the maximum flow demand of the fire protection system. 

 
2.  HYDROSTATIC TEST 
 
i.  Suction and discharge piping shall be hydrostatically tested at not less than 
200 psi (13.8 bar) pressure or at 50 psi (3.4 bar) in excess of the maximum 
pressure to be maintained in the system, whichever is greater. 

ii.  The pressure shall be maintained for 2 hours. 
iii. The installing contractor shall furnish a certificate for flushing and hydro-

static test prior to the start of the fire pump field acceptance test. 

 
3.  FIELD ACCEPTANCE TEST 
 
i. 

All electric wiring to the fire pump motor(s), including control (multiple 
pumps) interwiring, normal power supply, alternate power supply, and 
jockey pump, shall be completed and checked by the electrical contractor 
prior to the initial startup and acceptance test. 

ii.  A copy of the manufacturer's certified pump test curve shall be available 

for comparison with the results of the field acceptance test. 

iii.  The test procedures as per the manufacturer’s manual shall be followed 

and their results shall be verified. 

iv.  The actual unadjusted fire pump discharge flows and pressures installed 

v. 

shall meet or exceed the fire protection system's demand. 
The fire pump shall perform at minimum, rated, and peak loads without an 
objectionable overheating of any component. 

vi.  Vibrations of the fire pump assembly shall not be of a magnitude to pose 

potential damage to any fire pump component. 

vii.  Where simultaneous operation of multiple pumps is required as part of a 
system design, the acceptance test shall include a flow test of all pumps 
operating simultaneously. 

viii.  The maximum flow available shall be 150% of the rated flow of the pump. 
ix.  For electric motors operating at a rated voltage and frequency, the ampere 

demand on each phase shall not exceed the product of the full-load am-
pere rating times the allowable service factor as stamped on the motor 
nameplate. 

x.  The voltage at the motor contactor ouput lugs shall not vary more than 5% 

below or 10% above rated (nameplate) voltage during the test  

xi.  The fire pump or foam concentrate pump shall be in operation for not less 

than 1 hour. 

xii.  Consultant shall hand over one set of stamped record drawings and one 

copy of the completed test report to the building owner. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 759 of 1348 

 

Table 9.32.: Fire Pump  Testing, Inspection and Maintenance 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

2. WEEKLY     

INSPECTION 

1. VISUAL OBSERVATION 
 
i.  Piping is free of leakage. 
ii.  Pressure gauges reading are satisfactory. 
iii.  The controller pilot light is illuminated to ensure power is on. 
iv.  The transfer switch normal pilot light is illuminated. 
v.  The pump suction and discharge and bypass valves are fully open 
vi.  The suction line pressure gauge reading is within acceptable range. 
vii.  The system line pressure gauge reading is within acceptable range. 
viii. The suction reservoir has the required water level. 
ix.  The wet pit suction screens are unobstructed and in place. 
x.  The waterflow test valves are in the closed position. 
xi.  The ventilating louvers at the pump room are free to operate. 
xii.  The reverse phase alarm pilot light is off/the normal phase rotation pilot light is 

on. 

xiii.  The oil level in the vertical motor sight glass is within acceptable range. 
xiv.  The power to pressure maintenance (jockey) pump is provided. 
xv.  The diesel engine fuel tank is at least two-thirds full. 
xvi.  The diesel engine controller selector switch is in auto position. 
xvii.  The diesel engine batteries’ voltage readings are within acceptable range. 
xviii. All alarm pilot lights are off. 
xix.  The diesel Engine running time meter is reading. 
xx.  The oil level in the right angle gear drive is within acceptable range. 
xxi.  The crankcase oil level is within acceptable range. 
xxii.  The cooling water level is within acceptable range. 
xxiii. The electrolyte level in batteries is within acceptable range. 
xxiv. Battery terminals are free from corrosion. 

3. WEEKLY 

TESTS 

1. GENERAL 
 
i.  A non-flow test shall be conducted for electric motor-driven pump and diesel en-

gine-driven fire pumps without recirculating water back to the pump suction. 

ii.  The test shall be conducted by starting the pump automatically. 
iii.  The electric pump shall run a minimum of 10 minutes. 
iv.  The diesel pump shall run a minimum of 30 minutes  
 
2. FOLLOWING OBSERVATION RECORDS AND MAINTENANCE ADJUSTMENTS SHALL 

BE CARRIED OUT WHILE PUMP IS RUNNING 

 
i.  Record the pump starting pressure from the pressure switch /pressure  transduc-

ii.  Record the system suction and discharge pressure gauge readings. 
iii.  Inspect the pump packing glands for slight discharge, adjust gland nuts if neces-

er. 

sary 

iv.  Inspect for unusual noise or vibration. 
v. 
vi.  Record pressure switch or pressure transducer reading and compare to the pump 

Inspect packing boxes, bearings, or pump casing for overheating 

discharge gauge. 

vii.  For pumps that use electronic pressure sensors to control the fire pump opera-

tion, record the current pressure and the highest and the lowest pressure shown 
on the fire pump controller event log. 

viii. For electric motor and radiator cooled diesel pumps, check the circulation relief 

valve for operation to discharge water. 

ix.  Observe the time for motor to accelerate to full speed. 
x.  Record the time controller is on first step (for reduced voltage or reduced current 

starting) 

xi.  Record the time pump runs after starting (for automatic stop controllers) 
xii.  Observe the time for diesel engine to crank. 
xiii. Observe the time for diesel engine to reach running speed 
xiv. Observe the engine oil pressure gauge, speed indicator, water and oil temperature 

indicators periodically while the engine is running 

xv.  Record any abnormalities and initiate repair or maintenance or parts replacement 

through Civil Defence approved fire contractor. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 760 of 1348personnel, for no flow (churn), rated flow and 150% of pump rated flow along with 
water discharge through hose and other approved test devices. 

ii.  Any parts that needs to be repaired or replaced shall be handled through Civil De-

fence approved fire contractor. 

 

 

Table 9.32.: Fire Pump  Testing, Inspection and Maintenance 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

i.  Annually, each pump set shall be tested by qualified and Civil Defence approved 

4. ANNUAL 
TESTING 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 761 of 1348 

5.6. Standpipe and Hose Systems (Dry/Wet Risers) - acceptance 

test and maintenance 

 

5.6.1. 

Standpipe and Hose Systems shall be inspected and maintained as per minimum 
guidelines in accordance with Table 9.33. However, detailed acceptance, inspec-
tion tests and maintenance shall be as per NFPA 14 and NFPA 25. 

Table 9.33.: Standpipe (Dry and Wet Riser) Testing, Inspection and Maintenance 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  FLUSHING 
 
i.  The underground Piping shall be flushed. 
ii.  The piping between the fire department connection and the check valve in the in-
let pipe shall be flushed with a sufficient volume of water in order to remove any 
construction debris and trash accumulated in the piping prior to the completion of 
the system and prior to the installation of the Civil Defence connection. 

iii.  The minimum flow rate shall not be less than the hydraulically calculated water 

demand flow rate of the system plus hose demands. 

 
2.  HYDROSTATIC TEST 
 
i.  All new systems, including the yard piping and fire department connections, shall 

be tested hydrostatically at not less than 13.8 bar (200 psi) of pressure for 2 hours, 
or at 3.5 bar (50 psi) in excess of the maximum pressure where the maximum pres-
sure is in excess of 10.3 bar (150 psi). Pressure shall be maintained for 2 hours. 

ii.  The inside standpipe system piping shall show no leakage. 
iii.  Any leakage that results in a loss of pressure in excess of 0.1 bar (1½ psi) during a 

continuous 24-hour period shall be corrected. 

iv. The installing contractor shall furnish a certificate for flushing and hydrostatic test 

prior to the start of the fire pump and field acceptance test. 

v.  Hose connections and Civil Defence breeching inlet connections shall be tested for 
compatibility. (All UAE Civil Defence connections are instantaneous coupling type). 

vi.  The piping between the fire department connection and the check valve in the in-

let pipe shall be tested hydrostatically in the same manner. 

vii.During the hydrostatic test, the pressure gauge at the top of each standpipe shall 

be observed and the pressure recorded.  

 
3.  FIELD ACCEPTANCE TEST 
 
i.  Testing shall be conducted while fire pumps are running for wet riser systems. 
ii.  The water supply shall be tested to verify compliance with the design. This test 

shall be conducted by flowing water from the hydraulically most remote hose con-
nections. 

iii. For a Dry Riser standpipe, a fire department pumper or portable pump of a capaci-
ty to provide required flow and pressure shall be used to verify the system design 
by pumping into the fire department connection. 

iv. A flow test shall be conducted at each roof outlet to verify that the required pres-

sure is available at the required flow. 

v.  The maximum flow to be demonstrated from a single hose connection shall be 946 

L/min (250 gpm) for a 65-mm (2½-in.) connection and (379 L/min) 100 gpm for a 
40-mm (1½-in.) connection and 50 gpm for a 25 mm connection. 

vi. The filling arrangement for suction tanks shall be verified by shutting down all sup-

plies to the tank, draining the tank to below the designated low water level, and 
then opening the supply valve to ensure operation of its automatic features. 

vii. Each pressure-regulating device shall be tested to verify that the installation is cor-
rect, that the device is operating properly, and that the inlet and outlet pressures 
at the device are in accordance with the design. 

viii.Signs, both in English and Arabic shall be verified on site. 
ix. The consultant shall hand over one set of stamped record drawings and one copy 

of the completed test report to the building owner. 

1. ACCEPTANCE 

TEST 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 762 of 1348 

 

Table 9.33.: Standpipe (Dry and Wet Riser) Testing, Inspection and Maintenance 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

2. WEEKLY INSPECTION  VISUAL OBSERVATION 

 
i.  The piping is free of leakage. 
ii.  Pressure gauges are in good condition and reading are satisfactory. 
iii.  The hose cabinet is in good condition and contains equipment, nozzle, 

hose and hose outlets as per design (Class I, II or III). 

iv.  The landing valve and Hose outlets’ caps are in good condition and in 

place. 

v.  There are no obstructions to the Fire Hose Cabinet. 
vi.  Control valves, Valve handles and supervisory devices are not damaged 

and in good condition. 

i.  Hose connection caps shall be replaced where missing or damaged. 
ii.  Valves shall be lubricated to ensure their smooth operation. 
iii.  Hose, gaskets, nozzles shall be inspected for damage by removing from 

the cabinet and rereeled back into racks or stands. 

iv.  The hose shall always be connected to hose outlet valve. 
v.  Repair any leakages in the piping, valves and joints. 
vi.  Lubricate hose cabinet doors and replace them if corroded. 
vii.  Fire extinguishers in the cabinet shall be in a good working condition with 

satisfactory pressure readings. 

viii. Pumps and controllers of the system shall be tested, maintained as per           

Table 9.31. 

i.  A flow test shall be conducted every year on all standpipe systems to veri-

fy that the required flow and pressure are available at the hydraulically 
most remote  hose valve outlet(s) while flowing the standpipe system de-
mand. 

ii.  The standpipe system demand shall include 500 gpm (1892 L/min) for the 

first standpipe and 250 gpm (946 L/min) for each additional standpipe 
until the total system demand is simultaneously flowing. 

iii.  The 250 gpm (946 L/min) required from each additional standpipe shall 

be allowed to be flowed from the most convenient hose valve on that 
standpipe. 

iv.  A main drain test shall be performed on all standpipe systems. 
v.  Pressure and flow gauges shall be replaced every 5 years. 
vi.  Any parts that need to be repaired or replaced shall be handled through 

Civil Defence approved fire contractor. 

3. MAINTENANCE 

4. ANNUAL TESTING 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 763 of 1348 

5.7. Sprinkler and Deluge Systems - acceptance test and mainte-

nance 

 

5.7.1.  Automatic Sprinkler and Deluge Systems shall be inspected and maintained as per 
minimum guidelines in accordance with Table 9.34. However, detailed acceptance, 
inspection tests and maintenance shall be as per NFPA 13, NFPA 15 and NFPA 25. 

Table 9.34.: Sprinkler and Deluge Testing, Inspection and Maintenance 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  FLUSHING 
 
i.  The underground Piping shall be flushed. 
ii.  The piping between the fire department connection and the check valve in the in-
let pipe shall be flushed with a sufficient volume of water in order to remove any 
construction debris and trash accumulated in the piping prior to the completion of 
the system and prior to the installation of the Civil Defence connection. 

iii.  The minimum flow rate shall not be less than the hydraulically calculated water 

demand flow rate of the system plus hose demands. 

 
2.  HYDROSTATIC TEST 
 
i.  The piping network shall be tested hydrostatically at not less than 13.8 bar (200 
psi) of pressure for 2 hours, or at 3.5 bar (50 psi) in excess of the maximum pres-
sure where the maximum pressure is in excess of 10.3 bar (150 psi). The pressure 
shall be maintained for 2 hours. 

ii.  When deluge systems are being hydrostatically tested, plugs shall be installed in 
fittings and replaced with open sprinklers after the test is completed, or the oper-
ating elements of automatic sprinklers shall be removed after the test is complet-
ed. 

iii. For pre-action systems, in addition to the standard hydrostatic test, an air pres-
sure leakage test at 40 psi (2.7 bar) shall be conducted for 24 hours. Any leakage 
that results in a loss of pressure in excess of 11⁄2 psi (0.1 bar) for the 24 hours shall 
be corrected. 

iv. The piping, joints and discharge devices shall show no leakage. 
v.  Any leakage that results in a loss of pressure in excess of 0.1 bar (1½ psi) during a 

continuous 24-hour period shall be corrected. 

1. ACCEPTANCE 

TEST 

 

vi. The installing contractor shall furnish a certificate for flushing and hydrostatic test 

prior to the start of the fire pump and field acceptance test. 

vii.Hose connections and Civil Defence breeching inlet connections shall be tested for 
compatibility. (All UAE Civil Defence connections are instantaneous coupling type). 
viii. The piping between the breeching inlet connection and the check valve in the inlet 

pipe shall be tested hydrostatically in the same manner. 

 
3.  FIELD ACCEPTANCE TEST 
 
i.  The waterflow detecting devices including the associated alarm circuits shall be 

flow tested through the inspector’s test connection and shall result in an audible 
alarm on the premises within 5 minutes after such flow begins and until such flow 
stops.  

ii.  Testing shall be conducted while fire pumps are running for wet riser systems. 
iii. At least one remote sprinkler head shall be burst open with a heating device and 
associated system functions such as the alarm gong operation, fire pump opera-
tion, flow switch operation etc. shall be tested and verified. 

iv. The automatic operation of a deluge or pre-action valve shall be tested in accord-

ance with the manufacturer’s instructions. 

v.  Each pressure-regulating device shall be tested to verify that the installation is cor-
rect, that the device is operating properly, and that the inlet and outlet pressures 
at the device are in accordance with the design. 

vi. All control valves shall be fully closed and opened under system water pressure to 

ensure proper operation. 

vii. Signs, both in English and Arabic shall be verified on site. 
viii.The consultant shall hand over one set of stamped record drawings and one copy 

of the completed test report to the building owner. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 764 of 1348 

 

Table 9.34.: Sprinkler and Deluge Testing, Inspection and Maintenance 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

2. QUARTERLY            

INSPECTION 

i.  Sprinklers shall not show signs of leakage. They shall be free of corrosion, 
foreign materials, paint, and physical damage and shall be installed in the 
correct orientation (e.g., upright, pendent, or sidewall). 

ii.  Escutcheons and coverplates for recessed, flush, and concealed sprinklers 

shall be replaced if found missing during the inspection. 

iii. A minimum clearance from a sprinkler deflector and the top of storage shall 

be more than 1 m. 

dition. 

iv. Availability of correct type of spare sprinklers shall be verified. 
v.  Pressure and flow gauges shall be free of damage and in good working con-

vi. Waterflow alarm and supervisory signal initiating devices shall be inspected 

quarterly to verify that they are free of physical damages. 

vii.The hydraulic design information sign shall be inspected quarterly to verify 

that it is provided, attached securely to the sprinkler riser, and is legible. 

3. QUARTERLY TEST 

i.  Systems shall be tested quarterly as per FIELD ACCEPTANCE TEST as required 

by Table 9.33.1., by the Civil Defence approved maintenance contractor. 

i.  Valves shall be lubricated to ensure smooth operation. 
ii.  Pressure, flow gauges, supervisory signal devices and water flow devices 

shall be verified for good working condition. 

iii.  Detection system for deluge and pre-action systems shall be verified for 

good working condition. 

iv.  Leaking, damaged and corroded parts shall be replaced. 
v.  Pumps and controllers of the system shall be tested, maintained as per           

Table 9.31. 

4. MAINTENANCE 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 765 of 1348 

5.8. Foam Systems - acceptance test and maintenance 
 

5.8.1. 

Foam Systems shall be inspected and maintained as per minimum guidelines in 
accordance with Table 9.35. However, detailed acceptance, inspection tests and 
maintenance shall be as per NFPA 13, NFPA 11, NFPA 16 and NFPA 25. 

 

Table 9.35.: Foam Systems Testing, Inspection and Maintenance 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  FLUSHING 
 
i.  Water supply mains shall be flushed before connecting to system piping. 
ii.  The minimum flow rate shall not be less than the hydraulically calculated water 

demand flow rate of the system plus hose demands. 

 
2.  HYDROSTATIC TEST 
 
i.  The piping network shall be tested hydrostatically at not less than 13.8 bar (200 
psi) of pressure for 2 hours, or at 3.5 bar (50 psi) in excess of the maximum pres-
sure where the maximum pressure is in excess of 10.3 bar (150 psi). Pressure 
shall be maintained for 2 hours. 

ii.  The piping, joints and discharge devices shall show no leakage. 
iii.  Any leakage that results in a loss of pressure in excess of 0.1 bar (1½ psi) during a 

continuous 24-hour period shall be corrected. 

iv. The installing contractor shall furnish a certificate for flushing and hydrostatic 

test prior to the start of the fire pump and field acceptance test. 

v.  Hose connections and Civil Defence breeching inlet connections shall be tested 
for compatibility. (All UAE Civil Defence connections are instantaneous coupling 
type). 

vi.  The piping between the fire department connection and the check valve in the 

inlet pipe shall be tested hydrostatically in the same manner. 

 
3.  FIELD ACCEPTANCE TEST 
 
i.  The tests for total flooding systems shall establish that all automatic closing de-
vices for doors, windows, and conveyor openings, and automatic equipment in-
terlocks, as well as automatic opening of heat and smoke vents or ventilators, 
will function upon system operation. 

ii.  Deluge and pre-action and sprinkler systems shall be tested as per Table 9.33. 
iii.  The foam quality (expansion and one-quarter drain time) or foam discharge shall 
be conducted, or the foam discharge shall be visually inspected to ensure that it 
is satisfactory for the purpose intended. 

iv.  The foam proportion shall not be less than rated concentration. 
v.  Where conditions permit, flow tests shall be conducted to ensure that the haz-

ard is fully protected in conformance with the design specification 

vi. Waterflow detecting devices including the associated alarm circuits shall be flow 

tested through the inspector’s test connection and shall result in an audible 
alarm on the premises within 5 minutes after such flow begins and until such 
flow stops  

vii. Testing shall be conducted while fire pumps are running. 
viii.For Foam sprinkler systems, at least one remote sprinkler head shall be burst 
open with heating device and associated system functions such as alarm gong 
operation, fire pump operation, flow switch operation etc. shall be tested and 
verified. 

ix. The automatic operation of a deluge or pre-action valve shall be tested in ac-

cordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. 

x.  All control valves shall be fully closed and opened under the system water pres-

sure to ensure proper operation. 

xi. Signs, both in English and Arabic shall be verified on site. 
xii. The consultant shall hand over one set of stamped record drawings and one copy 

of the completed test report to the building owner. 

1. ACCEPTANCE 

TEST 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 766 of 1348 

 

Table 9.35.: Foam Systems Testing, Inspection and Maintenance 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

2. QUARTERLY            

INSPECTION 

i.  At least annually, an inspection shall be made of foam concentrates and their 

tanks or storage containers for evidence of excessive sludging or deteriora-
tion. 

ii.  The foam solution sample shall be annually tested at a laboratory to ensure 

the foam concentrate quality. 

iii. The proportioning system shall be inspected for good working condition. 
iv. The sight glass where provided on bladder tanks shall be cleaned. 
v.  The piping shall not show signs of leakage 
vi. Pressure and flow gauges shall be free of damage and in good working con-

vii. The position (open or closed) of valves shall be verified in accordance with 

specified operating conditions. 

viii.Strainers shall be periodically inspected and shall be cleaned after each use 

dition. 

and flow test.  

3. ANNUAL TEST 

i. 

ix. The waterflow alarm and supervisory signal initiating devices shall be in-

spected quarterly to verify that they are free of physical damage. 

x.  The hydraulic design information sign shall be inspected quarterly to verify 

that it is provided, attached securely to the sprinkler riser, and is legible. 

Systems shall be tested annually as per FIELD ACCEPTANCE TEST as re-
quired by Table 9.34.1., and this table, by the Civil Defence approved 
maintenance contractor. 

ii.  The foam concentrate pump shall be tested as per the manufacturers speci-

fications and manual. 

i.  Valves shall be lubricated to ensure their smooth operation. 
ii.  Pressure, flow gauges, supervisory signal devices and water flow devices 

shall be verified for good working condition. 

iii.  The detection system for deluge and pre-action systems shall be verified for 

good working condition. 

iv.  Leaking, damaged and corroded parts shall be replaced. 
v.  Pumps and controllers of the system shall be tested and maintained as per           

Table 9.32. 

4. MAINTENANCE 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 767 of 1348 

5.9. Clean Agent Systems - acceptance test and maintenance 
 

5.9.1. 

Clean Agent Systems shall be inspected and maintained as per the minimum guide-
lines in accordance with Table 9.36. However, detailed acceptance, inspection 
tests and maintenance shall be as per NFPA 2001, and Manufacturer’s guidelines. 

 

Table 9.36.: Clean Agent Systems Testing, Inspection and Maintenance 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

i.  The completed system shall be reviewed and tested by qualified personnel to 

meet the approval of Civil Defence. Only listed equipment and devices shall 
be used in the systems. To determine that the system has been properly in-
stalled and will function as specified, following inspection tests shall be per-
formed. 

ii.  The piping distribution system shall be inspected to determine that it is in 

compliance with the design and installation documents. 

iii. Nozzles and pipe size shall be in accordance with system drawings. Means of 

pipe size reduction and attitudes of tees shall be checked for their conform-
ance to the design. 

iv.  Piping joints, discharge nozzles, and piping supports shall be securely fas-

tened to prevent unacceptable vertical or lateral movement during dis-
charge. Discharge nozzles shall be installed in such a manner that piping can-
not become detached during discharge. 

v.  During assembly, the piping distribution system shall be inspected internally 

to detect the possibility of any oil or particulate matter soiling the hazard 
area or affecting the agent distribution due to a reduction in the effective 
nozzle orifice area. 

vi. The discharge nozzle shall be oriented in such a manner that an optimum 

agent dispersal can be effected. 

vii. If nozzle deflectors are installed, they shall be positioned to obtain the maxi-

mum benefit. 

viii.The discharge nozzles, piping, and mounting brackets shall be installed in 

such a manner that they will not potentially cause injury to personnel. Agent 
shall not directly impinge on areas where personnel could be found in the 
normal work area. The agent shall not directly impinge on any loose objects 
or shelves, cabinet tops, or similar surfaces where loose objects could be 
present and become missiles. 

ix. All agent storage containers shall be properly located in accordance with an 

approved set of system drawings. 

x.  All containers and mounting brackets shall be fastened securely in accord-

ance with the manufacturer’s requirements. 

xi. All total flooding systems shall have the enclosure examined and tested to 

locate and then effectively seal any significant air leaks that could result in a 
failure of the enclosure to hold the specified agent concentration level for 
the specified holding period. The currently preferred method is using a blow-
er door fan unit and smoke pencil. Quantitative results shall be obtained and 
recorded to indicate that the specified agent concentration for the specified 
duration of protection is in compliance with the consultant’s approved de-
signs.  

xii. The power shall be supplied to the control unit from a separate dedicated 

source that will not be shut down on system operation. 

xiii.Adequate and reliable primary and 24-hour minimum standby sources of 

energy shall be used to provide for operation of the detection, signaling, con-
trol, and actuation requirements of the system. 

xiv.The piping shall be pneumatically tested in a closed circuit for a period of 10 

minutes at 40 psig (276 kPa). At the end of 10 minutes, the pressure drop 
shall not exceed 20 percent of the test pressure. 

xv. A flow test using nitrogen or an inert gas shall be performed on the piping 

network to verify that flow is continuous and that the piping and nozzles are 
unobstructed. 

1. ACCEPTANCE TEST/ 

INSPECTIONS 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 768 of 1348 

 

Table 9.36.: Clean Agent Systems Testing, Inspection and Maintenance 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

2. FUNCTIONAL TESTS  i.  Disable each agent storage container release mechanism so that activation 

of the release circuit will not release the agent. Reconnect the release circuit 
with a functional device in lieu of each agent storage container release 
mechanism. For electrically actuated release mechanisms, these devices can 
include 24-V lamps, flashbulbs, or circuit breakers. Pneumatically actuated 
release mechanisms can include pressure gauges. Refer to the manufactur-
er’s recommendations in all cases. 

ii.  Operate detection initiating circuit(s). Verify that all alarm functions occur 

according to the design specifications. 

iii. Operate the necessary circuit to initiate a second alarm circuit if present. 
Verify that all second alarm functions occur according to design specifica-
tions. 

iv.  Operate manual release. Verify that manual release functions occur accord-

ing to design specifications. 

v.  Operate the abort switch circuit if supplied. Verify that abort functions occur 

according  to the design specifications. Confirm that visual and audible su-
pervisory signals are received at the control panel. 

vi. Test all automatic valves unless testing the valve will release agent or dam-

age the valve (destructive testing). 

vii. Check pneumatic equipment, where required, for integrity to ensure proper 

operation. 

viii.When all predischarge work is completed, each agent storage container shall 
be reconnected so that activation of the release circuit will release the agent. 
The system shall be returned to its fully operational design condition. 

3. MAINTENANCE 

 

i.  For halocarbon clean agents, if a container shows a loss in agent quantity of 
more than 5 percent or a loss in pressure (adjusted for temperature) of more 
than 10 percent, it shall be refilled or replaced. 

ii.  For inert gas clean agents that are not liquefied, pressure is an indication of 
agent quantity. If an inert gas clean agent container shows a loss in pressure 
(adjusted for temperature) of more than 5 percent, it shall be refilled or re-
placed. Where container pressure gauges are used for this purpose, they 
shall be compared to a separate calibrated device at least annually. 

iii. Where the amount of agent in the container is determined by special meas-

uring devices, these devices shall be listed. 

iv.  All halocarbon clean agent removed from refillable containers during service 
or maintenance procedures shall be collected and recycled or disposed of in 
an environmentally sound manner and in accordance with existing laws and 
regulations. 

v.  Factory-charged and nonrefillable containers that do not have a means of 

pressure indication shall have the agent quantity checked at least semiannu-
ally. If a container shows a loss in agent quantity of more than 5 percent, it 
shall be replaced. All factory-charged and nonrefillable containers removed 
from useful service shall be returned for recycling of the agent or disposed of 
in an environmentally sound manner and in accordance with existing laws 
and regulations and certification body and manufacturer’s guidelines and 
warnings. 

vi. For halocarbon clean agents, the date of inspection, gross weight of cylinder 
plus agent or net weight of agent, the type of agent, the person performing 
the inspection, and, where applicable, the pressure at a recorded tempera-
ture shall be recorded on a tag attached to the container. For inert gas clean 
agents, the date of inspection, the type of agent, the person performing the 
inspection, and the pressure at a recorded temperature shall be recorded on 
a tag attached to the container. 

vii. Cylinders continuously in service without discharging shall be given a com-

plete external visual inspection every 5 years or more frequently if required. 
The visual inspection shall be in accordance with Section 3 of CGA C-6, 
Standard for Visual Inspection of Steel Compressed Gas Cylinders, except 
that the cylinders not needed to be emptied or stamped while under pres-
sure. Inspections shall be made only by competent personnel, approved by 
Civil Defence, and the reports shall be furnished to the owner. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 769 of 1348 

6. Material Test Standards, Approval and registration. 

 
6.1. Acceptable Test Standards and criteria 

 
6.1.1.  All the Valves, Pumps, Piping, Hose, Nozzles, Devices, Sprinklers, Motors, Materials, 
Systems, Assemblies, equipment, Products and Accessories, referred to in this chap-
ter with respect to Life Safety, Fire Safety and Emergency Services shall be Listed, 
Approved and Registered by the Civil Defence Material Approval Department. 

 
6.1.2.  There is no year of edition mentioned against any test standards. It is the intent of 

Civil Defence to invite the customers seeking laboratory tests and the test labora-
tories to follow the “LATEST EDITION OF THE TEST STANDARD, AS AND WHEN 
THEY ARE UPGRADED/REVISED/AMENDED, TO THE DATE” 

 
6.1.3.  Fire Pump., Tested successfully at 150% of the rated flow. 
 

i. 
UL 448, Standard for Centrifugal Stationary Pumps for Fire-Protection Service. 
ii.  UL 448B, Standard for residential Fire Pumps intended for one and two family 

dwellings and manufactured homes. 

iii.  UL 448C, Standard for Stationary, Rotary type, positive displacement pumps 

for Fire Protection Service. 

iv.  FM 1319, Approval Standard for Centrifugal Fire Pumps (Horizontal, End Suc-

v. 

tion Type) 
FM 1370, Approval Standard for Centrifugal Fire Pumps (Vertical Shaft, Turbine 
Type, Barrel). 

vi.  FM 1313, Approval Standard for Positive Displacement Fire Pumps (Rotary 

Gear Type) 

vii.  FM 1312, Approval Standard for Centrifugal Fire Pumps (Vertical Shaft, Turbine 

Type). 

viii.  UL 162A, Fixed water motor coupled pumps for foam concentrate proportion-

ing. 

ix.  LPS 1131, Requirements and testing methods for pumps for automatic sprin-

x. 

kler installation pump sets. 
EN 12259-12, Fixed fire fighting systems — Components for sprinkler and wa-
ter spray systems — Part 12: Pumps 

xi.  LPS 1240, Requirements for LPCB approved fire sprinkler pump sets used in 

automatic sprinkler installations 

 

6.1.4.  Fire Pump Motor 
 

i. 

UL 1004-5, Standard for Fire Pump Motor. 

 
6.1.5.  Diesel Engine 
 

UL 1247, Standard for Diesel Engines for Driving Stationary Fire Pumps. 
FM 1333, Diesel Engine Fire Pump Drivers 

i. 
ii. 
iii.  LPS 1239, Requirements and testing procedures for the LPCB approval and 

listing of diesel engines for sprinkler pump sets  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 770 of 1348 

 

6.1.6.  Fire Pump Controller. 
 

i. 
ii. 

UL 218, Standard for Fire Pump Controller. 
FM 1321/1323, Standard for Fire Pump Controller for Electric Motor and Diesel 
Engine Driven Fire Pumps. 

iii.  LPS 1236, Requirements for control panels for diesel engine driven pumps 

used in automatic sprinkler installations. 

iv.  LPS 1237, Requirements for control panels for electric motor driven pumps 

used in automatic sprinkler installations  

 
6.1.7.  Sprinkler 
 

UL 199, Standard for Automatic Sprinklers for Fire Protection Service. 

i. 
ii.  UL 199J, Standard for Automatic Window Sprinklers for Fire Protection Service. 
iii.  UL 1626, Standard for Residential Sprinklers for Fire Protection Service. 
iv.  UL 1767, Standard for (ESFR) Early-Suppression Fast-Response Sprinklers. 
v.  UL 1767B, Standard for Specific application (ESFR) Pendent Sprinklers. 
vi.  FM 2000, Automatic Control Mode Sprinklers for fire protection. 
vii.  FM 2030, Residential Automatic Sprinklers for fire protection. 
viii.  FM 2008, Suppression Mode ESFR Automatic Sprinklers 
ix.  FM 1632, Telescoping Sprinkler Assemblies for Use in Fire Protection Systems 

x. 

for Anechoic Chambers 
EN 12259-1, Fixed firefighting systems. Components for sprinkler and water 
spray systems. Sprinklers 

xi.  prEN 12259-14, Fixed firefighting systems. Components for sprinkler and water 

spray systems. Sprinklers- Part 14. Sprinklers for residential applications 

xii.  LPS 1038, Requirements & Testing Methods for EPEC Sprinklers 

xiii.  LPS 1039, Requirements & Testing Methods for Automatic Sprinklers (inc TS1 

Automatic Sprinklers commercial and domestic & residential, TS 4 Multiple Jet 

Controls, TS 8 Electrically Operated Sprinkler Heads, TS 9 Dual Sensing Sprin-

kler Heads) 

xiv.  LPS 1258, Requirements & Testing Methods for tight operating tolerance glass 

sprinkler bulbs 

xv.  LPS 1267, Requirements & Testing Methods for ESFR Sprinkler Heads 

xvi.  LPS 2072, Requirements & Testing Methods for K160 ELO Sprinkler Heads 
xvii.  BS 9252, Components for residential sprinkler systems. Specification and test 

methods for residential sprinklers. 

xvii.  UL 2167 Water Mist Nozzles for Fire-Protection Service nozzles for Fire-

Protection Service 

xix.  UL 2351, Water Spray Nozzles 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 771 of 13486.1.8.  Fire Hose 
 

FM 2111,2131, Fire Hose Assemblies and Hose couplings. 
FM 2141, Fire Hose racks and reels. 

i. 
ii. 
iii.  UL 19, Lined Fire Hose and Hose Assemblies. 
iv.  UL 219, Lined Fire Hose for Interior Standpipes. 
v. 

EN 671-1, Fixed firefighting systems.  Hose systems.  Hose reels with semi-rigid 
hose 

vi.  EN 671-2, Fixed firefighting systems. Hose systems. Hose systems with lay-flat 

hose 

vii.  EN 14540, Fire-fighting hoses. Non-percolating layflat hoses for fixed systems 
viii.  BS EN 694, Fire-fighting hoses.  Semi-rigid hoses for fixed systems 
ix.  BS 336, Fire-fighting hose couplings 
 

 
6.1.9.  Fire Fighting Nozzles 
 

i. 

FM 5511 - Firefighting Nozzles for Use with Hose, Monitor Assemblies and oth-
er Firefighting Equipment. 

ii.  UL 401, Portable Spray Hose Nozzles for Fire-Protection Service  
 

6.1.10.  Fire Fighting Monitors 
 

i. 

FM 1421 - Monitor Assembly  

 
6.1.11.  Fire Hose Cabinets 
 

FM 2151, Fire Hose houses and outdoor hose cabinets. 

i. 
ii.  UL 47, Semiautomatic Fire Hose Storage Devices 

 
6.1.12.  Water Mist Systems 
 

i. 
ii. 

FM 5560, Water Mist Systems. 
LPS 1283, Requirements and test methods for the approval of watermist sys-
tems for use in commercial low hazard occupancies 

 
 
 

 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 772 of 13486.1.13.  Underground Pipes and Fittings 
 

i. 

ii. 

FM 1613, Approval Standard for Polyethylene (PE) Pipe and Fittings for under-
ground fire protection service, in accordance with NFPA 24 and AWWA C906, 
minimum DR-9 with temperature and pressure rating not less than the system 
working pressure. 
FM 1614, Approval Standard for Fiber Reinforced Composite (FRC) Pipes and 
Fittings for underground fire protection service. 

iii.  FM 1620, Approval Standard for Pipe joints and anchor fittings for under-

ground fire protection service.  

iv.  UL 1285 Pipe and Couplings, Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC), and Oriented Polyvinyl 

Chloride (PVCO) for Underground Fire Service 

v.  UL 1713 Pressure Pipe and Couplings, Glass Fiber-Reinforced, for Underground 

Fire Service 

 vi.  UL 194 Gasketed Joints for Ductile-Iron Pipe and Fittings for Fire Protection 

Service 

 
6.1.14.  Aboveground Pipes and Fittings 
 

i. 

FM 1920, Approval Standard for Pipe coupling and fittings for aboveground fire 
protection service.  

ii.  ANSI/UL 852, Metallic Sprinkler Pipe for Fire Protection Service 
iii.  ANSI/UL 1821, Thermoplastic Sprinkler Pipe and Fittings for Fire Protection 

Service 

iv.  FM 1637, Flexible Sprinkler Hose with Fittings 
v. 
FM 1630, Steel Pipe for Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems 
vi.  UL 852, Metallic Sprinkler Pipe for Fire Protection Service  
vii.  UL 1821, Thermoplastic Sprinkler Pipe and Fittings for Fire Protection Service  
viii.  ASTM A53, Galvanized Steel ERW Pipe, sch 40.  
ix.  ASTM A53, Galvanized Steel Seamless Pipe, sch 40.  

 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 773 of 1348 

 

6.1.15.  Valves 
 

FM 1041, Approval Standard for Alarm Check Valve 
FM 1021, Dry Pipe Valves 

i. 
ii. 
iii.  FM 1020, Automatic Water Control Valves 
iv.  FM 1120, 1130, Fire Service Water Control Valves (OS & Y and NRS Type Gate 

Valves) 

v.    FM 1210, Swing Check Valves 
vi.  FM 1362, Pressure Reducing Valves 
vii.  FM 1031, Quick Opening Devices (Accelerators and Exhausters) for Dry Pipe 

Valves 

FM 1140, Quick Opening Valves 1⁄4 Inch Through 2 Inch Nominal Size 

viii.  FM 1042, Waterflow Alarm Indicators (Vane Type) 
ix.  FM 1045, Waterflow Detector Check Valves 
x. 
xi.  FM 1111, Approval Standard for Post Indicator Valve assembly 
xii.  FM 1112, Indicating Valves (Butterfly or Ball Type) 
xiii.  ANSI/UL 193, Alarm Valves for Fire Protection Service 
xiv.  ANSI/UL 260, Dry Pipe and Deluge Valves for Fire Protection Service 
xv.  UL 1478, Fire Pump Relief Valves 
xvi.  UL 1726, Automatic Drain Valves for Standpipe Systems 
xvii.  UL 2573, Air release valve 
xviii. UL 258, Shutoff Valves for Trim and Drain Purposes 
xix.  UL 668, Hose Valves for Fire Protection Service 
xx.  UL 1486, quick Opening Devices for Dry Pipe Valves for Fire Protection Service 
xxi.  UL 1468, Pressure Reducing Valve 
xxii.  UL 1726, Automatic Drain Valves for Standpipe Systems 
xxiii. UL 258, Shutoff Valves for Trim and Drain Purposes 
xxiv. UL 262, Gate Valves for Fire Protection Service 
xxv.  ANSI/UL 312, Check Valves for Fire Protection Service 
xxvi. UL 1091, Butterfly Valves for Fire Protection Service 
xxvii.  ANSI/UL 1468, Direct Acting Pressure Reducing, Restricting Valves 
xxviii.  ANSI/UL 1739, Pilot-Operated Pressure-Control Valves  
xxix.  EN 12259-2, Fixed firefighting systems.  Components for sprinkler and water 

xxx. 

spray systems.  Wet alarm assemblies. 
EN 12259-3, Fixed firefighting systems.  Components for sprinkler and water 
spray systems.  Dry alarm valve assemblies. 

xxxi.  BS 5041-1, Fire hydrant systems equipment.  Specification for landing valves 

for wet risers. 

xxxii.  BS 5041-2, Fire hydrant systems equipment.  Specification for landing valves 

for dry risers. 

xxxiii.  BS 5041-4, Fire hydrant systems equipment.  Specification for boxes for land-

ing valves for dry risers. 

xxxiv.  BS 12094-13, Fixed firefighting systems.  Components for gas extinguishing 
systems.  Requirements and test methods for check valves and non-return 
valves. 

xxxv.  BS 5041-3, Fire hydrant systems equipment.  Specification for inlet breeching 

s for dry riser inlets. 

xxxvi.  BS 5041-5, Fire hydrant systems equipment.  Specification for boxes for foam 

inlets and dry riser inlets. 

xxxvii. BS 5154, Gate Valve. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 774 of 13486.1.15.  Valves 
 

xxxvii.  BS EN 593, Industrial vales. Metallic butterfly valves 
xxxviii.  LPS 1040, Requirements and Testing Methods for Wet Alarm Valve Sets 
xxxix.  LPS 1041, Requirements and Testing Procedures for the LPCB Approval and 

Listing of Dry Pipe Valve Sets 
LPS 1185, Requirements for Testing Gear Operated Butterfly Valves 

xxxx. 

xxxxi.  LPS 1186, Requirements and Testing Methods for Check Valves 

xxxxii.  EN 12259-2, Fixed firefighting systems. Components for sprinkler and water 

spray systems. Wet alarm valve assemblies 

xxxxiii.  EN 1074-1, Valves for fire water  
xxxxiv.  EN 1074-2, Valves for fire water 
xxxxv.  EN 12259-3, Fixed firefighting systems. Components for sprinkler and water 

spray systems. Dry alarm valve assemblies 

xxxxvi.  LPS TS3, Requirements and Testing for Deluge Valves and Actuators 
xxxxvii. LPS 2071,Requirements for LPCB Approved Pre-Action Systems for use in 

sprinkler systems  

xxxxviii. prEN 12259-9. Fixed firefighting systems. Components for sprinkler and 

water spray systems. Part 9. Deluge alarm valves 

xxxxix.  UL 789. Indicator Posts for Fire-Protection Service  
 

 
6.1.16.  Hangers 
 

i. 
ii. 

ANSI/UL 203, Pipe Hanger Equipment for Fire Protection Service 
FM 1951, 1952, 1953, Pipe Hanger Components for Automatic Sprinkler Sys-
tems 

iii.  FM 1950, Seismic Sway Brace Components for Automatic Sprinkler Systems 
iv.  LPS 1194, Requirements & Test Methods for Pipe Hangers 
 

6.1.17.  Fittings 

Fittings ANSI/UL 213, Rubber Gasketed Fittings for Fire Protection Service 
FM 1920, Pipe Couplings and Fittings for Fire Protection Systems 

 
i. 
ii. 
iii.  UL 1474, Adjustable Drop Nipples for Sprinkler Systems 
iv.  FM 1631, Adjustable and Fixed Sprinkler Fittings 1⁄2 Inch through 1 Inch Nomi-

nal Size 

v.  ANSI/UL 2443, Flexible Sprinkler Hose with Fittings for Fire Protection Service 
vi.  LPS 1219, Requirements and testing procedures for the LPCB approval and 

listing of pipe couplings 

vii.  LPS 1261, Requirements for Testing Flexible Hoses for Sprinkler Systems 
 

6.1.18.  Water Motor Gong 
 

FM 1055, Approval Standard for Water Motor Gong. 

i. 
ii.  BS EN 12259-4, Fixed firefighting systems.  Components for sprinkler and wa-

ter spray systems.  Water motor alarms. 

iii.  UL 346, Waterflow Indicators for Fire Protective Signaling Systems 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 775 of 1348 

 

6.1.19.  Wet Chemical Systems 
 

i. 

ii. 

UL 300, Fire Testing of Fire Extinguishing Systems for Protection of Commercial  
Cooking Equipment. 
LPS 1223, Requirements & Testing Procedures for Approval of fixed Fire Ext 
Systems for Catering Equipment 

 
6.1.20.  Dry Chemical Systems 
 

i. 
ii. 

UL 1254, Standard for pre-engineered Dry Chemical Fire extinguishing System. 
FM 5320 - Dry Chemical Extinguishing Systems  

 
6.1.21.  Inert Gas Clean Agent Systems 
 

UL 2127, Standard for Inert Gas Clean Agent Extinguishing System Units. 
FM 5600 - Clean Agent Extinguishing Systems  

i. 
ii. 
 

6.1.22.  Chemical Gas Clean Agent Systems 
 

UL 2166, Standard for Halocarbon Clean Agent Extinguishing System 
Units. 
FM 5600 - Clean Agent Extinguishing Systems  

i. 

ii. 
 

6.1.23.  CO2 Systems (Industrial Use Only) 
 

i. 

FM 5420 - Carbon Dioxide Extinguishing Systems   

 
6.1.24.  Foam System 
 

UL 162, Standard for Safety Foam Equipment and Liquid Concentrates. 
i. 
ii.  UL 139, Standard for Medium and High Expansion foam Equipment and 

Liquid Concentrates. 
FM-5133, Standard for Safety Foam Equipment  

 
iii.  FM 5130 - Foam Extinguishing Systems  

 
6.1.25.  Deluge/Pre-action System 

FM 1011/1012/1013, Deluge and Pre-action Sprinkler Systems. 

 
i. 
ii.  UL 260/262/260 - Pre-action Systems 
 

6.1.26.  Yard Hydrant System, Wet Barrel, above ground 

 
i. 
ii. 
ii.    EN 1074-6, Fitness for verification test, Hydrants 

UL 246, Standard for Hydrants for Fire Protection. 
FM 1510/1511 - Fire Hydrants (Dry/Wet Barrel Type) for Private Fire Service.  

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 776 of 1348 
6.1.27.  Heavy Duty Mobile Equipment Protection Systems 

 
i. 

FM 5970 - Heavy Duty Mobile Equipment Protection Systems. 

 
6.1.28.  Fire Water Tanks and Ancillaries 

 
i. 

 

LPS 1276, Requirements for the LPCB Certification and Listing of above ground 
Suction Tanks for Sprinkler Systems. 

6.1.29.  Fire rated Cable, Certified for 120 minutes 

  

i. 

EN 50200, Method of test for resistance to fire of unprotected small cables for 

use in emergency circuits 

ii.    UL  2196, Standard for Fire Test for Circuit Integrity of Fire-Resistive Power, 

Instrumentation, Control, and Data Cables  

iii.    BS 8434-2, Methods of test for assessment of the fire integrity of electric ca-

bles. Test for unprotected small cables for use in emergency circuits. BS EN 

50200 with a 930° flame and with water spray . 

iv.    BS 7629-1, Electric cables. Specification for 300/500 V fire resistant screened 

cables having low emission of smoke and corrosive gases when affected by 

fire. Multicore and multipair cables. 

v.    BS 6387, Test method for resistance to fire of cables required to maintain cir-

cuit integrity under fire conditions. 

vi.    IEC 60331-1, Tests for electric cables under fire conditions. 

vii.    IEC 60331-2, Tests for electric cables under fire conditions. 

viii.   IEC 60332-2-2, Tests on electric and optical fibre cables under fire conditions. 

ix.    IEC 60332-3-10, Tests on electric and optical fibre cables under fire conditions. 

x.     IEC 60331-2, Tests for electric cables under fire conditions. 

xi.    UL 1724, Outline of Investigation for Fire Tests for Electrical Circuit Protective 

Systems. 

xii.   UL 1685, Standard for Vertical-Tray Fire-Propagation and Smoke-Release Test 

for Electrical and Optical-Fiber Cables. 

xiii.   UL 1666, UL 1666 Test for Flame Propagation Height of Electrical and Optical-

Fiber Cables Installed Vertically in Shafts.  

 

6.1.30.  Breeching inlet 

 
i. 
 

UL 405, Fire Department connections. 

6.1.31.  Fire Pump Assembly 

 
i. 

UL 448 D, Outline of Investigation for Fire Pump, Driver and Controller Assem-
bly Rating Compatibility  

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 777 of 1348Chapter 10 
SMOKE CONTROL AND SMOKE 
MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 778 of 1348In this Chapter: 
Î Design criteria for ventilation, smoke containment and smoke 

management systems. 

Î Application of smoke control systems for various locations and 

occupancies. 

Î Acceptance tests and maintenance of smoke control systems. 

Intent of the Chapter: 

•  Restrict the spread of smoke through air duct systems within a building 

or into a building from the outside. 

•  To  maintain  tenable  conditions,  limit  smoke  from  entering  stairwells, 
means of egress, smoke refuge areas, elevator shafts, or similar areas 
where evacuees are in the process of egress during fire emergencies. 

•  Assist fire fighters visibility during combating fire and post fire smoke 
clearance, Contribute to the protection of life and property, enabling the 
reduction of downtime of the affected facility and business. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 779 of 1348