 

In this Chapter : 

Intent of the Chapter 

  To familiarize end users of various types of  Fire  

Extinguishers. 

  To enable designers and owners to Choose extinguishers 

appropriately according to the hazard. 

  To regulate the inspection and maintenance of Fire 

Extinguishers. 

  Definition of various types of 

fire extinguishers 

  Classes of Fires and applicable 
categories of fire extinguishers 

  Inspection and maintenance of 

fire extinguishers 

 

1. Definitions 

1.1. General 

It is a mandatory requirement from Civil Defence. 

1.1.1.  Shall  
 
 
1.1.2.  Should 
 
 
1.1.3.  Listed 
 
 
1.1.4.  Gallon. U.S. Standard and Kilogram  
 

 
1.1.5.  Kilogram  
 

1 Kg = 2.20.lb (Pounds) 

 

It is a suggested requirement recommended by Civil Defence but not mandatory. 

Approved and registered by individual Emirates’ Civil Defence material department. 

1 U.S. gal = 3.785 L., 1 Kg = 1.8 Liter, Approx. (Units used in this chapter are either Kil-
ograms or US Gallons. Conversion of Liter to Kg without  knowing specific density, 
Liter conversion to Kg is approximate.) 

 

 
 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 353 of 1348 

 

1.2. Fire Extinguishers 

 
1.2.1.  Class A Fire  
 

Fires in ordinary combustible materials, such as wood, cloth, paper, rubber, and many 
plastics. 

 
1.2.2.  Class B Fire  
 

Fires in flammable liquids, combustible liquids, petroleum greases, tars, oils, oil-based 
paints, solvents, lacquers, alcohols, and flammable gases. 

Fires that involve energized electrical equipment. 

 
1.2.3.  Class C Fire  
 
 
1.2.4.  Class D Fire  
 

Fires in combustible metals, such as magnesium, titanium, zirconium, sodium, lithium, 
and potassium. 

 
1.2.5.  Class K Fire  
 

Fires in cooking appliances that involve combustible cooking media (vegetable or ani-
mal oils and fats). 

 
1.2.6.  Light (Low) Hazard  
 

Light hazard occupancies are locations where the total amount of Class A combustible 
materials, including furnishings, decorations, and contents, is of minor quantity. This 
can include some buildings or rooms occupied as offices, classrooms, churches, as-
sembly halls, guest room areas of hotels/motels, and so forth. This classification antic-
ipates that the majority of content items are either noncombustible or so arranged 
that a fire is not likely to spread rapidly. Small amounts of Class B flammables used for 
duplicating machines, art departments, and so forth, are included, provided that they 
are kept in closed containers and safely stored. 

 
1.2.7.  Ordinary (Moderate) Hazard  
 

Ordinary hazard occupancies are locations where the total amount of Class A combus-
tibles and Class B flammables are present in greater amounts than expected under 
light (low) hazard occupancies. These occupancies could consist of dining areas, mer-
cantile shops and allied storage, light manufacturing, research operations, auto show-
rooms, parking garages, workshop or support service areas, and warehouses contain-
ing Class I or Class II commodities as defined Chapter 9. Fire Fighting Systems, Defini-
tions. 

 
1.2.8.  Extra (High) Hazard  
 

Extra hazard occupancies are locations where the total amount of Class A combusti-
bles and Class B flammables present, in storage, production, use, finished product, or 
combination thereof, is over and above those expected in occupancies classed as or-
dinary (moderate) hazard. These occupancies could consist of woodworking; vehicle 
repair; aircraft and boat servicing; cooking areas; individual product display show-
rooms; product convention center displays; and storage and manufacturing processes 
such as painting, dipping, and coating, including flammable liquid handling. Also in-
cluded is warehousing of or in-process storage of other than Class I and Class II com-
modities. 

 

 
 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 354 of 13481.2. Fire Extinguishers 

 
1.2.9.  Carbon Dioxide 
 

A colorless, odorless, electrically nonconductive inert gas that is a suitable medium 
for extinguishing Class B and Class C fires. 

 
1.2.10.  Dry Chemical  
 

A mixture of finely divided solid particles, usually sodium bicarbonate-, potassium 
bicarbonate-, or ammonium phosphate–based with added particulate material sup-
plemented by special treatment to provide resistance to packing, and moisture ab-
sorption (caking), and to promote proper flow characteristics. 

 
1.2.11.  Wet Chemical  
 

Wet chemicals include, but are not limited to, solutions of water and potassium ac-
etate, potassium carbonate, potassium citrate, or any combinations thereof 

 
1.2.12.  Dry Powder 
 

Solid materials in powder or granular form designed to extinguish Class D combus-
tible metal fires by crusting, smothering, or heat-transferring means. 

 
1.2.13.  Film Forming Foam 
 

The film-forming foam agents referenced in this standard are AFFF (aqueous film-
forming foam) and FFFP (film-forming fluoroprotein foam). 

 
1.2.14.  Halocarbon Agents  
 

Halocarbon agents include hydrochlorofluorocarbon (HCFC), hydrofluorocarbon 
(HFC), perfluorocarbon (PFC), and fluoroiodocarbon (FIC) types of agents. 

 
1.2.15.  High Pressure Cylinder  
 

For the purposes of this standard, high-pressure cylinders (and cartridges) are those 
containing nitrogen, compressed air, carbon dioxide, or other gases at a pressure 
higher than 500 psi (3447 kPa) at 70°F (21°C). 

 
1.2.16.  Low Pressure Cylinder 
 

For the purposes of this standard, low-pressure cylinders are those containing fire 
extinguishing agent (medium), nitrogen, compressed air, or other compressed gases 
at a service pressure of 500 psi (3447 kPa) or lower at 70°F (21°C). 

 
1.2.17.  Portable Fire Extinguisher  
 

Portable fire extinguishers are intended as a first line of defense to cope with fires 
of limited size. They are needed even if the property is equipped with automatic 
sprinklers, standpipe and hose, or other fixed protection equipment. 

 
1.2.18.  Extinguisher Service Pressure 
 

The normal operating pressure as indicated on the nameplate or cylinder of a fire 
extinguisher. 

 
1.2.19.  Factory Test Pressure 
 

The pressure at which a shell was tested at time of manufacture. This pressure is 
shown on the nameplate. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 355 of 13481.2. Fire Extinguishers 

 
1.2.20.  Recharging 
 

The replacement of the extinguishing agent (also includes the expellant for certain 
types of fire extinguishers). 

 
1.2.21.  Servicing  
 

Includes one or more of the following: (a) maintenance, (b) recharging, (c) hydro-
static testing. 

 
1.2.22.  Cartridge Operated Fire Extinguisher 
 

A fire extinguisher in which the expellant gas is in a separate container from the 
agent storage container. 

 
1.2.23.  Non-rechargeable Extinguisher 
 

A nonrechargeable (nonrefillable) fire extinguisher is not capable of (nor intended 
to be capable of) undergoing complete maintenance, hydrostatic testing, and being 
restored to its full operating capability by the standard practices used by fire equip-
ment dealers and distributors. 

 
1.2.24.  Portable Fire Extinguisher  
 

A portable device, carried or on wheels and operated by hand, containing an extin-
guishing agent that can be expelled under pressure for the purpose of suppressing 
or extinguishing fire. 

 
1.2.25.  Rechargeable Extinguisher 
 

A rechargeable (refillable) fire extinguisher is capable of undergoing complete 
maintenance, including internal inspection of the pressure vessel, replacement of 
all substandard parts and seals, and hydrostatic testing. 

 
1.2.26.  General Use Residential Extinguisher 
 

A fire extinguisher that has been  specifically investigated, tested, and listed for use 
only in and around the home (one- and two-family dwellings and living units within 
multifamily structures) for the purpose of suppressing or extinguishing a fire. 

 
1.2.27.  Self Expellant Fire Extinguisher  
 

A fire extinguisher in which the agents have sufficient vapor pressure at normal op-
erating temperatures to expel themselves 

 
1.2.28.  Wheeled Type Extinguisher 
 

A portable fire extinguisher equipped with a carriage and wheels intended to be 
transported to the fire by one person. 

 
 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 356 of 1348 

2.  Fire Extinguishers 

 

2.1. Intention 

2.1.1.  Portable Fire Extinguishers are the best available first response to tackle the fire at 
its incipient stage. The intention of this chapter is to provide a guideline about the 
types of extinguishers applicable to various natures of fires. 

 
2.1.2.  However, usage of fire extinguishers shall be limited to informed and trained person-
nel. Any fire can grow into catastrophe within minutes. It is not the intention of Civil 
Defence nor recommendation for people to stay within fire vicinity to fight fires with 
portable extinguishers, unless the fire is manageable scale and person using the ex-
tinguisher is trained. 

 

2.2. Basic Awareness 

2.2.1.  The following are the basic steps necessary to put a 

fire extinguisher into operation:                                                                           
a. Recognition of equipment as a fire extinguisher                                                                       
b. Selection and suitability of a fire extinguisher                                                                      
c. Transport of a fire extinguisher to the fire                                                                                   
d. Actuation of the fire extinguisher                                  
e. Application of the extinguishing agent to the fire 

extinguisher was       

The modern fire       

Did You Know? 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
2.2.2.  When a fire extinguisher is being selected, the fol-
lowing physical conditions should be considered.  

2.2.2.1.  Gross Weight. In the selection of a fire 
extinguisher, the physical ability of the 
user should be contemplated. When the 
hazard exceeds the capability of a hand 
portable fire extinguisher, wheeled fire 
extinguishers or fixed systems should be 
considered. 

invented by British 

Captain George       

William Manby in 1818. 

It consisted of a      

copper vessel of 3  

gallons (13.6  liters) of 

pearl ash (potassium 

carbonate) solution 

contained within        

compressed air. 

                                
 
                      
  2.2.2.2. Corrosion. In some fire extinguisher installations, there exists a possibility 
of exposing the fire extinguisher to a corrosive atmosphere. Where this is 
the case, consideration should be given to providing the fire extinguishers 
so exposed with proper protection or providing fire extinguishers that have 
been found suitable for use in these conditions. 

 
  2.2.2.3. Agent Reaction. The possibility of adverse reactions, contamination, or oth-

er effects of an extinguishing agent on either manufacturing processes or 
on equipment or both, should be considered in the selection of a fire extin-
guisher. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 357 of 1348                                                     
  2.2.2.4. Wheeled Units. Where wheeled fire extinguishers are used, consideration 

should be given to the mobility of the fire extinguisher within the area in 
which it will be used. For outdoor locations, the use of proper rubber-tired 
or wide-rimmed wheel designs should be considered according to terrain. 
For indoor locations, the size of doorways and passages should be large 
enough to permit ready passage of the fire extinguisher. 

 
  2.2.2.5. Wind and Draft. If the hazard is subject to winds or draft, the use of fire 

extinguishers and agents having sufficient range to overcome these condi-
tions should be considered. 

 
  2.2.2.6. Availability of Personnel. Consideration should be given to the number of 
persons available to operate the fire extinguishers, the degree of training 
provided, and the physical capability of the operators. 

 

2.2.3.  Extinguishers should be kept near a door that can be used as an escape route. 
 
2.2.4.  Stay low. Avoid breathing the heated smoke, vapors, or fumes as much as possible, 

as well as the extinguishing agents. 

 
2.2.5. 

If you feel confident in attacking the fire, use the appropriate fire-fighting equip-
ment. If the fire is not extinguished quickly, get out of the building, closing door(s) 
behind you, and do not re-enter until the facility management handles the incident 
and Civil Defence personnel evaluate the situation. 

 
2.2.6.  A fire creates conditions of stress and intense excitement. Under these conditions, 
the choice of a correct fire extinguisher needs to be made quickly. The protection 
planner/Facility Management/Authorized First Responder can help to ensure selec-
tion of the correct fire extinguisher by using the following procedures:                              
a. Locating the fire extinguisher near fire hazards for which they are suitable.            
b. Using fire extinguishers suitable for more than one class of fire                                  
c. Marking clearly the intended use.                                                                                       
d. Training employees in the use of proper fire extinguishers. 

 
2.2.7.  The use of conspicuous markings to readily identify a fire extinguisher’s suitability is 

particularly important where fire extinguishers are grouped or where multiple fire 
hazards are present in an area. 

 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 358 of 13482.2.8. Obsolete Extinguishers 
 

2.2.8.1.   The following types of extinguishers are considered obsolete and should 

be removed from service and replaced:                                                                                                                     
a. Soda acid types                                                                                                                                 
b. Chemical foam (excluding film-forming agents)                                                                       
c. Vaporizing liquid                                                                                                                                 
d. Cartridge-operated water                                                                                                                
e. Cartridge-operated loaded stream                                                                                                         
f. Copper or brass shell fire extinguishers (excluding pump tanks) joined 
by soft solder or rivets                                                                                                                                               
g. Extinguishers rated prior to 1955 and marked B-1,C-1 on the name-
plate                                                                                                                                        
h. Fire extinguishers not listed or labeled 
i. Halon 1211 and Halon 1301 Agents 

 
 
                                                     

2.2.9. Training 
 

2.2.9.1.   At least 10 % of the Security personnel, Occupants, Employees and Su-

pervisory personnel of each occupancy shall be trained on basic fire 
awareness, types, use and operation of fire extinguishers in emergency 
situation. 

2.2.9.2.   The training shall be conducted by an authorized agency by the Civil De-

fence or by the Civil Defence department personnel. 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 359 of 1348 

2.3. General Requirements  

2.3.1.  The General requirements of Fire Extinguisher shall be as per Table 4.1. 
 

 

Table 4.1: General Requirements of Fire Extinguishers 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  EXTINGUISHER 

RATING 

2.  EXTINGUISHER 
CLASSIFICATION 

AS PER THE TEST LABORATORIES FOLLOWING ARE THE RATING CRITERIA 
 
i.  Class A Rating. Tested on Wood 
ii.  Class B Rating. Tested on 5.1 cm depth n-heptane fires in square pans. 
iii. Class C Rating. No fire test. Agent must be a nonconductor of electricity 
iv. Class D Rating. Special tests on specific combustible metal fires 
v.  Class K Rating. Special tests on cooking appliances using combustible cooking 

media (vegetable or animal oils and fats) 

i.  The classification of fire extinguishers shall consist of a letter that indicates the 

class of fire on which a fire extinguisher has been found to be effective, pre-
ceded by a rating number (Class A and Class B only) that indicates the relative 
extinguishing effectiveness. 

ii.  Fire extinguishers classified for use on Class C, Class D, or Class K hazards shall 

not be required to have a number preceding the classification letter. 

iii.  Class A: The Fires involving ordinary combustible solid materials such as wood, 

cloth, paper, rubber, and many other plastics. 

iv.  Class B: The Fires involving flammable liquids, combustible liquids, all petrole-

um based products, solvents, paints, chemicals and flammable gases. 

v.  Class C:The Fires involving energized electrical equipment due to ignition of 

electrical nature. 

vi.  Class D: The Fires involving combustible metals, such as magnesium, titanium, 

zirconium, sodium, lithium, and potassium. 

vii.  Class K: The Fires involving cooking appliances due to combustible cooking 

media such as vegetable oils and animal fats etc.  

 
1.  LABELING 
 
i.  An extinguisher labeling for example (UL Listed), “2-A:10-B:C” conveys the 

following information.                                                                                                        
a. Extinguisher is capable of extinguishing Class A fire with equivalency of 2.5 
gallons of water (Number 1=1.25 Gal of water, number 2=2.5 Gal of water, 
number 3=3.25 Gal of water etc.)                                                                                  
b. Extinguisher is capable of extinguishing class B fire with a capacity of 10 ft2 
of coverage. (Number against B implies square foot coverage of extinguisher 
for class B fires)                                                                                                                 
c. Extinguisher is also applicable to Class C fires and is non conductive (Usually 
there are no numbers against C) 

 
 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 360 of 1348 

Table 4.1: General Requirements of Fire Extinguishers 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

3. PLANNING 

Area and arrangement of the building occupancy conditions 
Severity of the hazard 

THE FOLLOWING ITEMS SHOULD BE EVALUATED BEFORE SELECTING,  INSTALLA-
TION AND DISTRIBUTING PORTABLE FIRE EXTINGUISHERS IN A BUILDING: 
 
i. 
ii. 
iii.  Anticipated classes of fire 
iv.  Other protective systems or devices 
v.  Distances to be traveled to reach fire extinguishers 
vi.  Anticipated rate of fire spread 
vii. 
viii.  Smoke contributed by the burning materials 
ix.  Accessibility of a fire to close approach with portable fire extinguishers 

Intensity and rate of heat development 

4.  INSTALLATION  i. 

ii. 

Portable fire extinguishers shall be maintained in a fully charged and operable 
condition and shall be kept in their designated places at all times when they are 
not being used. 
Fire extinguishers shall be conspicuously located where they will be readily ac-
cessible and immediately available in the event of fire. Preferably, they shall be 
located along normal paths of travel, including exits from areas. 

iii.  Before installing any fire-extinguishing equipment, read and understand the 

installation and use instructions, including the limitations, cautions, and warn-
ings contained on the equipment and in the owner’s manual. 

iv.  Portable extinguishers shall be installed in an accessible spot, free from block-

ing by storage and equipment, and near room exits that provide an escape 
route. So that the top of the extinguisher is not more than 1.5 m above the 
floor and not less than 30 cm from the bottom of extinguisher to the finished 
floor. 
The extinguisher should be easy to reach and remove and should be placed 
where it will not be damaged. 

v. 

vi.  Portable extinguishers shall be installed on hangers or in the brackets supplied 

by the manufacturer, mounted in cabinets, or placed on shelves. 

vii.  Extinguishers shall be placed so that the operating instructions on the extin-

guisher face outward. 

viii.  Fire extinguishers shall not be installed / placed in any areas where the temper-

atures outside of the listed temperature range shown on the fire extinguisher 
label. Generally the fire extinguishers are permitted to be installed in the areas 
where temperatures ranging from 40C to 490C. 

ix.  Fire extinguishers cabinets shall not be kept locked in any case with in the facili-
ty. While installation, all the fire extinguishers shall be fully charged and ready 
for use in case of an emergency.  

 

 

Figure 4.1.:  Symbols for Fire Extinguisher Classes 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 361 of 1348 

 

Table 4.1: General Requirements of Fire Extinguishers 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

5.  SAFETY      

i.  Most fires produce toxic decomposition products of combustion, and some 

materials can produce highly toxic gases. Fires can also consume available oxy-
gen or produce dangerously high exposure to convected or radiated heat. All of 
these can affect the degree to which a fire can be safely approached with extin-
guishing equipment. 

ii.  Discharging portable fire extinguishers from too close a distance on cooking 

grease fires can cause splashing of the burning grease or oil and spread the fire. 
The recommended distance for operating portable fire extinguishers is shown 
on the label. 

iii.  Portable fire extinguishers should not be installed adjacent to the location of a 

potential fire hazard but should be accessible to the hazard. 

iv.  Halogenated agent extinguisher labels contain information such as the mini-

mum volume of room that can be properly and safely protected.  

v.  When using these extinguishers, avoid breathing the discharged agent or the 

gases produced by the thermal decomposition of the agent.  

vi.  Evacuate and ventilate the area immediately after use.  
vii.  Carbon dioxide fire extinguishers contain an extinguishing agent that will not 
support life when used in sufficient concentration to extinguish a fire. The use 
of a carbon dioxide extinguisher(s) in an unventilated space can dilute the oxy-
gen supply. Prolonged occupancy of such spaces can result in loss of conscious-
ness due to oxygen deficiency.  

viii.  Extinguishers not classified for Class C hazards present a shock hazard if used 

on fires involving energized electrical equipment. 

ix.  Dry chemical extinguishers, when used in a small unventilated area, can reduce 

x. 

visibility for a period of up to several minutes. 
For confined spaces, prominent caution labels on the fire extinguisher, warning 
signs at entry points, provision for remote application, extra-long-range fire 
extinguisher nozzles, special ventilation, provision of breathing apparatus and 
other personal protective equipment, and adequate training of personnel are 
among the measures that should be considered. 

1.  GENERAL 
 
i. 

Persons who are expected to use a fire extinguisher should be made familiar 
with all information contained in the manufacturer’s nameplate(s) and the in-
struction manual.  

ii.  Proper operation of a fire extinguisher requires the operator to execute several 

basic steps in a certain sequence. The fire extinguisher designer, the approval 
agencies, the installer, and the protection planner can influence significantly 
the ease and likelihood of these steps being accomplished properly.  

iii.  Where employees have not been trained, operation of fire extinguishers could 

be seriously delayed, the extinguishing material could be wasted due to poor 
application techniques, and more fire extinguishers could have to be used, or 
the fire could possibly not be extinguished. 

PRECAUTIONS 

6. OPERATION 

AND USE 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 362 of 1348 

 

 

ITEMS 

6. OPERATION 

AND USE 

 

Table 4.1: General Requirements of Fire Extinguishers 

REQUIREMENTS 

2.  RECOGNITION OF EQUIPMENT AS AN EXTINGUISHER 
 
i. 

Permanent marking on the front of fire extinguishers shall be present, indi-
cating their purpose, content and usage. 

ii.  Additional signage, not a part of the device, shall be provided to indicate the 

location of a fire extinguisher. These preferably should be standardized 
throughout the property so that all fire extinguishers are easily “spotted.” The-
se markings could be in the form of electric lights, placards, mounting boards, 
overhead signs, color panels or stripes, or cabinets.  
If fire extinguishers are located along the normal exit paths from an area, per-
sonnel are more inclined to take them and return to the site of a fire. 

iii. 

 
3.  TRANSPORT OF A FIRE EXTINGUISHER TO THE FIRE 
 
i. 

A fire extinguisher should be mounted and located so it can be easily removed 
in a fire emergency and brought to the site of the fire as quickly as possible. It 
should be readily accessible without need for moving or climbing over stock, 
materials or equipment. 

ii.  Quick transport of an extinguisher depends on several factors such as weight of 

the extinguisher, travel distance to fire location, using stairs, using gloves, con-
gestion of premises, physical ability of the user. Preplanning shall address all 
these issues to successful and efficient use of fire extinguishers. 
In the case of wheeled fire extinguishers, the width of aisles and doorways and 
the nature of the flooring and outside grounds over which the fire extinguisher 
needs to be moved should be taken into account. 

iii. 

 
4.  ACTUATION OF FIRE EXTINGUISHER 
 
i.  Once the fire extinguisher has been transported to the fire site, it should be 
placed into operation without delay. Employees should be familiar with any 
steps needed to actuate any fire extinguisher. Here is where previous training is 
most valuable, since there is little time to stop and read operating instructions 
on the nameplate. 

ii.  Position for Operation. The intended position for operation is usually marked 

on the fire extinguisher. When the position of operation is obvious (such as 
when one hand holds the fire extinguisher and the other hand holds the noz-
zle), this information can be omitted. 

iii.  Removal of Restraining or Locking Devices. Many fire extinguishers have an 
operation safeguard or locking device that prevents accidental actuation. The 
most common device is a lock pin or ring pin that needs to be withdrawn before 
operation. 

iv.  Start of Discharge. This requires one or more of several actions such as 

turning or squeezing a valve handle or lever, pushing a lever, or pumping. 

v.  Agent Application. This act involves direction of the stream of extinguishing 
agent onto the fire. Nameplate information has advisory notes regarding the 
application of the agent to different types of fires. 

vi.  Remember the “PASS” word. 
 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 363 of 1348 

 

 

 

Figure 4.2.:  Fire Extinguisher Signage for various locations 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 364 of 1348 

2.4. Types of Fire Extinguishers  

2.4.1.  The Selection of Fire Extinguishers shall be based on Table 4.2. 
 

 

Table 4.2: Types and Selection of Fire Extinguishers 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  WATER TYPE 

1. DESCRIPTION 
 
i.  The most popular type is the 2½ gal (9.46 L) stored-pressure water fire extin-
guisher. These fire extinguishers are being used to replace inverting types of 
water fire extinguishers (soda acid and cartridge-operated water) that are no 
longer manufactured. An important advantage of the stored-pressure water 
type, as opposed to inverting types, is its ability to be discharged intermittent-
ly. Some models are suitable for use at freezing conditions when charged as 
specified on the nameplate.  

ii.  This includes water, antifreeze, wetting agent, and loaded stream fire extin-
guishers. These fire extinguishers are intended primarily for use on Class A 
fires. The stream initially should be directed at the base of the flames. After 
extinguishment of flames, it should be directed generally at smoldering or 
glowing surfaces. Application should begin as close as possible to the fire. Deep
-seated fires should be thoroughly soaked and might need to be “broken apart” 
to effect complete extinguishment. 

 
2. APPLICATION 
 
i.  Class A fires., Wood, Paper, Textile, Garbage, Furniture, Residential Plastic, In-

terior décor. 

 
3. NOT SUITABLE FOR  
 
i.  Class B fires., Flammable Liquids. 
ii.  Class C fires., Electrical equipment, Office equipment, Computers. 
iii. Class K Fires., Cooking fires, Kitchen, grease, oil fires. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 365 of 1348 

 

Table 4.2: Types and Selection of Fire Extinguishers 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

2.  FOAM TYPE  1. DESCRIPTION 

 
i.  AFFF (aqueous film-forming foam) and FFFP (film-forming fluoroprotein)-type fire 
extinguishers are rated for use on both Class A and Class B fires. They are not suita-
ble for use in freezing temperatures. An advantage of this type of extinguisher when 
used on Class B flammable liquid fires of appreciable depth is the ability of the 
agent to float on and secure the liquid surface, which helps to prevent reignition.  

ii.  Fire extinguishers of these types are usually available in hand portable models of 1.6 
gal (6 L) and 2½ gal (9.46 L) and in wheeled models having a liquid capacity of 33 gal 
(125 L). These fire extinguishers have ratings of 2-A:10-B, 3-A:20-B, and 20-A:160-B, 
respectively. 

iii.  The extinguishing agent is a solution of film-forming surfactant in water that forms 

mechanical foam when discharged through an aspirating nozzle. On Class A fires, 
the agent acts as both a coolant and penetrant to reduce temperatures to below 
the ignition level. On Class B fires, the agent acts as a barrier to exclude air or oxy-
gen from the fuel surface. 

iv. On flammable liquid fires of appreciable depth, best results are obtained when the 
discharge from the fire extinguisher is played against the inside of the back wall of 
the vat or tank just above the burning surface to permit the natural spread of the 
agent back over the burning liquid. If this cannot be done, the operator should 
stand far enough away from the fire to allow the agent to fall lightly upon the burn-
ing surface — the stream should not be directed into the burning liquid. Where pos-
sible, the operator should walk around the fire while directing the stream to get 
maximum coverage during the discharge period.  

v.  For fires in ordinary combustible materials, the agent can be used to coat the burn-
ing surface directly. For flammable-liquid spill fires, the agent could be flowed over 
a burning surface by bouncing it off the floor just in front of the burning area. 

vi. Film-forming foam agents are not effective on flammable liquids and gases escaping 

under pressure or cooking-grease fires. 

 
2. APPLICATION 
 
i.  Class A fires., Wood, Paper, Textile, Garbage, Furniture, Residential Plastic, Interior 

décor. 

ii.  Class B fires., Flammable Liquids. 
 
3. NOT SUITABLE FOR  
 
i.  Class C fires., Electrical equipment, Office equipment, Computers. 
ii.  Below 40C ambient temperatures 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 366 of 1348 

 

Table 4.2: Types and Selection of Fire Extinguishers 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. CARBON DIOXIDE (CO2) 
 
i.  The principal advantage of CO2 (carbon dioxide) fire extinguishers is that the 

agent does not leave a residue after use. This can be a significant factor where 
protection is needed for delicate and costly electronic equipment.  

ii.  Carbon dioxide extinguishers are listed for use on a Class B and Class C fire. 

Since the agent is discharged in the form of a gas/snow cloud, it has a relatively 
short range of 3 ft. to 8 ft. (1 m to 2.4 m).  

iii. Thus, initial application needs to start reasonably close to the fire. On all fires, 

the discharge should be directed at the base of the flames. The discharge 
should be applied to the burning surface even after the flames are extinguished 
to allow added time for cooling and to prevent possible reflash. 

iv. The most commonly used method of agent application on contained flamma-
ble liquid fires is to start at the near edge and direct the discharge in a slow, 
side-to-side sweeping motion, gradually progressing toward the back of the 
fire. The other method is called overhead application. The discharge horn is 
directed in a dagger or downward position (at an angle of about 45 degrees) 
toward the center of the burning area. Generally, the horn is not moved, as in 
the other method, because the discharge stream enters the fire from above 
and spreads out in all directions over the burning surface. For spill fires, the 
side-to-side sweeping motion could give better.  

v.  On fires involving electrical equipment, discharge should be directed at the 

source of  the flames. It is important to de-energize the equipment as soon as 
possible to eliminate the potential of reignition. These agents are not suitable 
for use on pressurized fuel fires or cooking-grease fires. 

 
2. APPLICATION 
 
i.  Class C fires., Electric equipment, office equipment, computers, printing ma-

chines, copy machines. 

ii.  Class B fires., Flammable Liquids. 
 
3. NOT SUITABLE FOR  
 
i.  Water soluble flammable liquids such as alcohol, acetone, esters, ketones. 

3.  CO2 TYPE 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 367 of 1348 

 

Table 4.2: Types and Selection of Fire Extinguishers 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  DRY POWDER (MULTI PURPOSE) 
 
i.  Fire extinguishers of this type contain an ammonium phosphate base agent. 

Hand fire extinguishers are available with fire extinguishment ratings of 1-A to 
20-A and 10-B:C to 120-B:C and wheeled models with fire extinguishment 
ratings of 20-A to 40-A and 60-B:C to 320-B:C.  

ii.  Multipurpose agents are used in exactly the same manner as ordinary dry 
chemical agents on Class B fires. For use on Class A fires, the multipurpose 
agent has the additional characteristic of softening and sticking when in con-
tact with hot surfaces. In this way, it can adhere to burning materials and form 
a coating that will smother and isolate the fuel from air.  

iii. When applying the agent, it is important to try to coat all burning areas in or-
der to eliminate or minimize the number of small embers that could be a po-
tential source of reignition. The agent itself has little cooling effect and, be-
cause of its surface coating characteristic, it cannot penetrate below the burn-
ing surface. For this reason, extinguishment of deep-seated fires could possibly 
not be accomplished unless the agent is discharged below the surface or the 
material is broken apart and spread out. 

iv. Fire extinguishers with a Class B rating can extinguish a fire involving combus-

tible cooking media (vegetable or animal oils and fats).  

v.  Only fire extinguishers having a Class K rating are recommended for use on 

cooking-grease fires. 

 
2. APPLICATION 
 
i.  Class A fires., Wood, Paper, Textile, Garbage, Furniture, Residential Plastic, In-

terior décor. 

ii.  Class B fires., Flammable Liquids. 
iii. Class C fires., Electric equipment, office equipment, computers, printing ma-

chines, copy machines. 

iv. Class D fires., Metal fires involving magnesium, titanium, zirconium, sodium, 

lithium, and potassium. 

 
3. NOT SUITABLE FOR  
 
i.  Though it is multipurpose, Class rating should be strictly followed. 

4.  DRY POWDER 

TYPE 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 368 of 1348 

 

Table 4.2: Types and Selection of Fire Extinguishers 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  DRY CHEMICAL 
 
i. 

Due to the different designs and the various types of dry chemical agents, 
choosing the most suitable dry chemical fire extinguisher requires careful 
evaluation.  

ii.  Hand portable  models have a discharge stream that ranges from 10 ft. to 30 

ft. (3 m to 9 m), depending on fire extinguisher size. Compared with carbon 
dioxide or halogenated agent fire extinguishers, they will also perform better 
under windy conditions. 

iii.  Dry chemical fire extinguishers are available in two basic styles: stored pres-
sure and cartridge-operated. The stored-pressure (rechargeable) type is the 
most widely used and is best suited where infrequent use is anticipated and 
where skilled personnel with professional recharge equipment are available.  
iv.  The cartridge-operated type has the advantage of being quickly refilled in re-

v. 

mote locations without the need for special equipment.  
Some dry chemical models can be equipped with long-range (high-velocity) 
nozzles or applicators that are beneficial in applying the agent under certain 
special fire-fighting conditions. 

vi.  The potassium and urea-potassium base bicarbonate agents are selected in 
preference to sodium bicarbonate, principally because of their greater fire-
extinguishing capabilities. If corrosion is not a factor, potassium chloride can 
also be included in this group.  

vii.  The ammonium phosphate base agent (multipurpose) is the only dry chemical 

agent that is suitable for Class A protection. In addition to Class B and Class C 
protection, the residues of multipurpose dry chemical, when left in contact 
with metal surfaces, can cause corrosion. 

viii.  Where dry chemical fire extinguishers are utilized for Class C protection, it is 

important to consider that the residue of potassium chloride is more corrosive 
than other dry chemicals and that a multipurpose base agent will be more 
difficult to remove because it first softens when in contact with hot surfaces 
and then hardens when it cools.  

ix.  Stored-pressure fire extinguishers are available in capacities from 1 lb to 30 lb 

(0.5 kg to 14 kg) for hand fire extinguishers and 125 kg to 250 lb (57 kg to 
113.5 kg) for wheeled fire extinguishers. Cartridge/cylinder-operated fire ex-
tinguishers are available in capacities from 4 lb to 30 lb (1.8 kg to 14 kg) for 
hand fire extinguishers and 45 lb to 350 lb (20 kg to 159 kg) for wheeled fire 
extinguishers  

 
2. APPLICATION 
 
i.  Class A fires., Wood, Paper, Textile, Garbage, Furniture, Residential Plastic, Inte-

rior décor. 

ii.  Class B fires., Flammable Liquids. 
iii. Class C fires., Electric equipment, office equipment, computers, printing ma-

chines, copy machines. 

iv. Class D fires., Metal fires involving magnesium, titanium, zirconium, sodium, 

lithium, and potassium. 

 
3. NOT SUITABLE FOR  
 
i.  Class rating should be strictly followed. 

6.  DRY CHEMICAL 

TYPE 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 369 of 1348 

 

Table 4.2: Types and Selection of Fire Extinguishers 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

7.  WET CHEMICAL 

TYPE 

1.  WET CHEMICAL 
 
i.  Fire extinguishers of this type are available in hand portable models of 1.5 gal (6 

L) and 2½ gal (9.46 L). The extinguishing agent can be comprised of, but is not 
limited to, solutions of water and potassium acetate, potassium carbonate, po-
tassium citrate, or a combination of the aforementioned chemicals (which are 
conductors of electricity). The liquid agent typically has a pH of 9.0 or less.  

ii.  On Class A fires, the agent works as a coolant. On Class K fires (cooking-oil fires), 
the agent forms a foam blanket to prevent reignition. The water content of the 
agent aids in cooling and reducing the temperature of the hot oils and fats be-
low their autoignition point. The agent, when discharged as a fine spray directly 
at cooking appliances, reduces the possibility of splashing hot grease and does 
not present a shock hazard to the operator. 

iii. In recent years, the development of high-efficiency cooking equipment with 

high-energy input rates and the widespread use of vegetable oils with high au-
toignition temperatures has highlighted the need for a new Class K fire extin-
guisher. The wet chemical extinguisher was the first extinguisher to qualify to 
the new Class K requirements. 

iv.  In addition to offering rapid fire extinguishment, a thick foam blanket is formed 

to prevent reignition while cooling both the appliance and the hot cooking oil. 
Wet chemical extinguishers also offer improved visibility during fire fighting as 
well as minimizing clean-up afterwards. 

 
2. APPLICATION 
 
i.  Class A fires., Wood, Paper, Textile, Garbage, Furniture, Residential Plastic, Inte-

rior décor. 

ii.  Class K fires., Kitchen fires, deep seated cooking, fryer oil fires. 
 
3. NOT SUITABLE FOR  
 
i.  Class rating should be strictly followed. 
ii.  Class B fires., Flammable Liquids. 
iii. Class C fires., Electric equipment, office equipment, computers, printing ma-

chines, copy machines. 

iv. Class D fires., Metal fires involving magnesium, titanium, zirconium, sodium, 

lithium, and potassium. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 370 of 1348 

 

Table 4.2: Types and Selection of Fire Extinguishers 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

8.  HALOCARBON 
       (CLEAN 

AGENT) TYPE 

1.  HALOCARBON (CLEAN AGENT) 
 
i.  Halocarbon agents are similar to halon agents in that they are nonconductive, 

noncorrosive, and evaporate after use, leaving no residue.  

ii.  Larger models of halocarbon fire extinguishers are listed for Class A as well as 

Class B and Class C fires, which makes them quite suitable for use on fires in 
electronic equipment.  

iii.  Compared to carbon dioxide on a weight-of-agent basis, halocarbon agents are 
at least twice as effective. When discharged, the agent is in a combined form of 
a gas/mist with about twice the range of carbon dioxide. To some extent, windy 
conditions or strong air currents could make extinguishing difficult. 

iv. On flammable liquid fires, best results are obtained when the discharge from 
the fire extinguisher is employed to sweep the flame off the burning surface, 
applying the discharge first at the near edge of the fire and gradually progress-
ing toward the back of the fire by moving the discharge nozzle slowly from side 
to side.  

v.  In using fire extinguishers of this type in unventilated places, such as small 

rooms, closets, or confined spaces, operators and other persons should avoid 
breathing the extinguishing agent or the gases produced by thermal decomposi-
tion.  

 
2. APPLICATION 
 
i.  Class A fires., Wood, Paper, Textile, Garbage, Furniture, Residential Plastic, Inte-

rior décor. 

ii.  Class B fires., Flammable Liquids, excluding pressurized fuels 
iii. Class C fires., Electric equipment, office equipment, computers, printing ma-

chines, copy machines 

 
3. NOT SUITABLE FOR  
 
i.  Pressurized fuels. 
ii.  Class K fires., Cooking and grease fires. 
iii. Outdoors and unenclosed spaces. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 371 of 1348 

 

Table 4.2: Types and Selection of Fire Extinguishers 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

9.  WHEELED TYPE  1.  WHEELED TYPE EXTINGUISHER 

 
i.  The selection of any type of wheeled fire extinguisher is generally associated 
with a recognized need to provide additional protection for special hazards or 
large, extra-hazard areas.  

ii.  Where wheeled fire extinguishers are to be installed, consideration should be 

given to mobility within the area in which they will be used. 

iii. For outdoor locations, models with rubber tires or wide-rim wheels will be easi-

er to transport.  

iv. For indoor locations, doorways, aisles, and corridors need to be wide enough to 

permit the ready passage of the fire extinguisher.  

v.  Because of the magnitude of the fire it will generally be used on, this type of fire 
extinguisher should be reserved for use by operators who have actually used the 
equipment, who have received special instructions on the use of the equipment, 
or who have used the equipment in live fire training. 

 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 372 of 1348 

 

2.5. Application of Fire Extinguishers  

2.5.1.  The application of Fire Extinguishers for various hazards shall be as per Table 4.3. 

Table 4.3: Application of Fire Extinguishers 

HAZARD 

AREA 

TYPE OF EXTINGUISHER  DISTRIBUTION 

 
i.  Multi-purpose Dry Pow-

der (ONE) 

2-A, 20-B, C 
4 Kg 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AND 
 
i.  CO2 Type (ONE) 
5 Kg 

i.  Each extinguisher of 

size mentioned serves 
approximately 280 m2 
of the area. 

ii.  Maximum travel dis-

tance to such an extin-
guisher shall not be 
more than 30 m. That is 
from any point of the 
area, there shall be one 
extinguisher within a 
distance of 30 m. 

iii. Extinguishers shall be 
placed along the corri-
dors, waiting areas, 
shops, supermarkets, 
service corridors, staff 
and reception areas 
etc., where people can 
easily find and use 
them during fire acci-
dents. 

iv. As a practice fire extin-
guishers are placed in 
Fire Hose Cabinets in 
UAE. Such cabinets 
shall clearly have sign-
age that indicates pres-
ence of extinguishers 
inside the Fire Hose 
Cabinet (FHC) 

1. ASSEMBLY 
i.  Seating areas 
ii.  Corridors 
iii. Waiting areas 
iv. Exit routes 
 
2. BUSINESS 
i.  Office areas 
ii.  Shops 
iii. Corridors 
iv. Exit routes 
 
3. EDUCATIONAL 
i.  Corridors 
ii.  Reception 
iii. Auditoriums 
iv. Assembly halls 
v.  Locker rooms 
 
4. HEALTHCARE 
i.  Patient rooms 
ii.  Nurse Stations 
iii. Corridors 
iv. Waiting areas 
v.  Exit routes 
 
5. RESIDENTIAL 
i.  Apartments 
ii.  Corridors 
 
6. HOTEL 
i.  Guest Rooms 
ii.  Corridors 
iii. Reception 
iv. Dining areas 
v.  Exit routes 
 
7. DAYCARE 
i.  Corridors 
ii.  Reception 
iii. Exit routes 
 

1.  CLASS A 

FIRES 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 373 of 1348 

 

Table 4.3: Application of Fire Extinguishers 

HAZARD 

AREA 

TYPE OF EXTINGUISHER  DISTRIBUTION 

i.  Each extinguisher of 

size mentioned serves 
approximately 280 m2 
of the area. 

ii.  Maximum travel dis-

tance to such an extin-
guisher shall not be 
more than 30 m. That is 
from any point of the 
area, there shall be one 
extinguisher within a 
distance of 30 m. 

iii. Extinguishers shall be 
placed along the corri-
dors, waiting areas, 
shops, supermarkets, 
service corridors, staff 
and reception areas 
etc., where people can 
easily find and use 
them during fire acci-
dents. 

iv. As a practice fire extin-
guishers are placed in 
Fire Hose Cabinets in 
UAE. Such cabinets 
shall clearly have sign-
age that indicates pres-
ence of extinguishers 
inside the Fire Hose 
Cabinet (FHC) 

1.  CLASS A 

8. DETENTION AND           

FIRES 

CORRECTION 

 
i.  Multi-purpose Dry Pow-

der (ONE) 

2-A, 20-B, C 
4 Kg 
 
 
 
 
 
OR 
 
i.  CLEAN Agent Type (ONE) 
4 Kg 
 
 
 
 
 
AND 
 
i.  CO2 Type (ONE) 
5 Kg 

i.  Corridors 
ii.  Waiting areas 
iii. Assembly areas 
iv. Dining areas 
v.  Exit routes 
 
9. MERCANTILE 
i.  Office areas 
ii.  Shops 
iii. Supermarkets 
iv. Retail areas 
v.  Corridors 
vi. Exit routes 
 
10. MALLS 
i.  Corridors 
ii.  Information Desk 
iii. Service Corridor 
iv. Mall circulation areas 
v.  Play areas 
vi. Food courts 
vii. Exit routes 
 
11. STORAGE (WAREHOUSE) 

AND FACTORIES 

i.  Office areas 
ii.  Corridors 
 
12. ANIMAL HOUSING 
i.  Office areas 
ii.  Corridors 
iii. Storage areas 
 
12. FUEL DISPENSING 
i.  Mini Marts 
ii.  Restaurant seating areas 
 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 374 of 1348 

 

Table 4.3: Application of Fire Extinguishers 

HAZARD 

AREA 

TYPE OF EXTINGUISHER 

DISTRIBUTION 

i.  Foam Type (ONE) 
9 Liters (3 Gal) 
 
 
 
 
 
AND 
 
i.  Multi-purpose Dry Powder (ONE) 
2-A, 20-B, C 
4 Kg 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

i.  Each extinguisher 
of size mentioned 
serves approxi-
mately 280 m2 of 
the area. 

ii.  Maximum travel 
distance to such 
an extinguisher 
shall not be more 
than 15 m. That is 
from any point of 
the area, there 
shall be one extin-
guisher within a 
distance of 15 m. 
iii. Extinguishers shall 

be placed along 
the corridors, 
waiting areas, 
shops, supermar-
kets, service corri-
dors, staff and 
reception areas 
etc., where peo-
ple can easily find 
and use them dur-
ing fire accidents. 
iv. As a practice fire 
extinguishers are 
placed in Fire 
Hose Cabinets in 
UAE. Such cabi-
nets shall clearly 
have signage that 
indicates presence 
of extinguishers 
inside the Fire 
Hose Cabinet 
(FHC) 

2.  CLASS B 

FIRES 

1. ASSEMBLY 
i.  Bars 
ii.  Pubs 
iii. Night Clubs 
 
2. EDUCATIONAL 
i.  Laboratories 
ii.  Cleaning solvent 

stores 

 
3. HEALTHCARE 
i.  Chemical Stores 
ii.  Linen Stores 
iii. Waste Storage 
iv. Cleaning solvent 

stores 

 
4. HOTEL 
i.  Chemical Stores 
ii.  Linen Stores 
iii. Waste Storage 
iv. Cleaning solvent 

stores 

 
5. MERCANTILE 
i.  Chemical Stores 
ii.  Flammable liquid 

Stores 

 
6. MALLS 
i.  Service Corridor 
ii.  Cleaning solvent 

stores 

 
7. STORAGE 

(WAREHOUSE) 
AND FACTORIES 
i.  Chemical Storage 

and activity 

ii.  Flammable liquid 

Storage and activity 
iii. Flammable material 
Storage and activity 

 
 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 375 of 1348 

 

 

Table 4.3: Application of Fire Extinguishers 

HAZARD 

AREA 

TYPE OF EXTINGUISHER 

DISTRIBUTION 

3.  CLASS B 

1. FUEL DISPENSING  

FIRES 

STATIONS 

i.  Petrol Filling     

Station 

 
2. STORAGE 

(WAREHOUSE) 
AND FACTORIES 
i.  Bulk storage of 

flammable liquids  

ii.  Group A Plastic 

storage and activi-
ty 

 
3.  DIESEL GENERA-

TOR ROOM, DIE-
SEL GENERATOR 
SET/SHED 

4. PARKING AREAS 

i.  Wheeled Type Foam  (ONE) 
50 Liters (13 Gal) 
 
 
 
 
 
AND 
 
i.  Multi-purpose Dry Powder (ONE) 
2-A, 20-B, C 
4 Kg 
 
 
 
 

i.  Maximum travel 

distance to such an 
extinguisher shall 
not be more than 
15 m. That is from 
any point of the ar-
ea, there shall be 
one extinguisher 
within a distance of 
15 m. 

ii.  Extinguishers shall 
be placed  near the 
hazard in protected 
environment as per 
manufacturer’s 
guidelines. 

 

4.  CLASS C 

1.    ELECTRICAL/LV 

FIRES 

ROOM 

2.  TELEPHONE 

ROOM 

3.  LIFT MACHINE 

ROOM 

4.  AHU ROOM 
5.  MECHANICAL 
PLANT ROOM 
6.  CABLE SPREAD-

ING ROOMS 

7.  RMU ROOMS 
8.  SWITCHGEAR 

ROOM 

 

i.  CO2 Type (ONE) 
5 Kg 
 
 
 
 
 
OR 
 
i. CLEAN Agent Type (ONE) 
5 Kg 

5.  CLASS C 

FIRES 

9.    HV ROOM 
10. TRANSFORMER 

i.  Wheeled CO2 Type (ONE) 
12 Kg 

ROOM 

11. ELECTRICAL 

HEAVY EQUIP-
MENT AND 
MACHINARY 

 

i.  Maximum travel 

distance to such an 
extinguisher shall 
not be more than 9 
m. That is from any 
point of the area, 
there shall be one 
extinguisher within 
a distance of 9 m. 

ii.  Extinguisher shall be 

placed inside the 
room next to exit. 

i.  Maximum travel 

distance to such an 
extinguisher shall 
not be more than 9 
m. That is from any 
point of the area, 
there shall be one 
extinguisher within 
a distance of 9 m. 
ii.  Trolley mounted 

extinguisher shall be 
placed inside the 
room, next to exit. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 376 of 1348 

 

Table 4.3: Application of Fire Extinguishers 

HAZARD 

AREA 

TYPE OF EXTINGUISHER  DISTRIBUTION 

6.  CLASS K 

1. KITCHEN, HOMES 

FIRES 

i.  Extinguishers shall be 
placed inside kitchen 
next to Kitchen exit 
door. 

i. Multi-purpose Dry Powder 

(ONE) 

3A, 20-B, C 
2.5 Kg 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

7.  CLASS K 

2.  COMMERCIAL 

FIRES 

KITCHENS 

3.  RESTAURANT  

KITCHENS 

4.  FOOD COURT  

KITCHENS 

 

i.  Wet Chemical Type (ONE) 
9 Liters (3 Gal) 
 
AND 
 
i.  CO2 Type (ONE) 
5 Kg 

i.  Extinguishers shall be 
placed inside kitchen 
next to Kitchen exit 
door. 

i.  Wheeled D Type (ONE) 
12 Kg 

i.  Maximum travel dis-

tance to such an extin-
guisher shall not be 
more than 15 m. That is 
from any point of the 
area, there shall be one 
extinguisher within a 
distance of 15 m. 

8. CLASS D FIRES  1.   ACTIVITIES WHERE 

COMBUSTIBLE    
METALS SUCH AS   
MAGNESIUM,       
TITANIUM,            
ZIRCONIUM,         
SODIUM, LITHIUM, 
AND POTASSIUM 
ARE STORED AND 
HANDLED 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 377 of 1348 

3. Design, Installation, Inspection and Maintenance of Fire  

Fire Extinguishers 

 

 
3.1. 
 

Design/Specification and Submittals 

3.1.1.  Design, Specifications and Submittals to Civil Defence for approval shall be main 
consultants responsibility. Consultant shall have competent and knowledgeable 
personnel to understand the Civil Defence requirements and codes and standards. 

 
3.1.2.  Design submittals shall be complete with appropriate selection of fire extinguish-
ers, location on layouts as per maximum travel distances and table of number of 
fire extinguishers, in compliance with this code. 

 
Installation 

3.2. 
 

3.2.1. 

 
3.2.2. 

 
3.2.3. 

 
3.2.4. 

 
3.2.5. 

Installation of Fire Extinguishers shall be carried out only by Civil Defence approved 
and licensed contractors. General contractors, Civil contractors and MEP Contrac-
tors, fitout Contractors shall not be allowed to install Fire extinguishers, unless 
they are licensed. 

Fire extinguisher Installation contractor qualification and approval from Civil De-
fence is based on their training from respective system manufacturers, experience, 
understanding of codes and standards and workmanship. 

Fire extinguisher Installation contractors shall apply to Civil Defence and secure 
passing marks in Civil Defence examination to gain license and be qualified as 
“approved Fire extinguisher contractors”. 

Installation contractor shall not commence work on site without receiving Civil De-
fence stamped and approved drawings from the Consultant. 

It is contractors responsibility to adhere to consultant’s Civil Defence approved 
drawings and Manufacturer’s installation guidelines and specifications. 

 
Inspection and Acceptance 

Inspection and acceptance shall be main consultant’s responsibility. 

3.3.1. 
 
3.3.2.  Main consultant shall inspect contractor work during installations and ensure that 
fire extinguishers are charged, installed, inspected, commissioned and performing 
as per the Civil Defence approved drawings, manufacturer’s design and installation 
guidelines, acceptance criteria and their intended purpose. 

 
3.3.3. 

Consultant shall handover total number, types, location of fire extinguishers,  in-
spection report and maintenance manuals to the owner. 

Inspection and Maintenance 

3.4.1. 

The building owner, his appointed representative and the facility management 
shall be responsible to ensure that all the Fire Extinguishers in the facility are in-
spected regularly, maintained, charged and repaired to serve their intended pur-
pose during fire accidents. 

 

3.3. 
 

 
3.4. 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 378 of 1348 

3.4.2. 
 
3.4.3. 

The inspection and maintenance of Fire Extinguishers shall be as per Table 4.4. 

The fire extinguishers shall be serviced and maintained once every year. The Table 
4.4 requirements are minimum guidelines. NFPA 10 shall be referred for further 
details and maintenance requirements. 

Table 4.4: Inspection and Maintenance of Fire Extinguishers 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  ACCEPTANCE 
INSPECTION  

i. 

The location, designated place and appropriate type/rating of extinguisher for 
the hazard shall be verified and ensure that it is as per consultant and Civil De-
fence approved drawings. 
Extinguisher shall be installed at proper height as per this chapter. 

ii. 
iii.  The extinguisher shall be free of obstruction and in compliance with maximum 

travel distance requirements as per this chapter.  

iv.  Safety seals and tamper indicators shall be in place and not damaged or missing. 
v.  Operating instructions and labels on nameplates shall be legible and facing for-

ward and visible. 

vi.  Extinguisher shall be fully charged, weighing correctly as per manufacturer’s 

specification. 

vii.  Fie extinguishers shall be free of physical damage, dents, corrosion, leakage. 
viii.  Nozzles and spray horns shall be free of clogging. 
ix.  Pressure gauge reading or indicator shall be in the acceptable range as per man-

ufacturer’s specifications. 

x.  Where wheeled or trolley mount extinguishers are installed, condition of tires, 

wheels, carriage, hose and nozzles shall be in good working condition.  

xi.  Visual signage, pointing at the location of extinguisher, both in Arabic and Eng-

lish shall be in place and visible. 

xii.  Corrective actions shall be taken if any of the above inspections result in unac-

ceptable conditions. 

xiii.  A record of the acceptance test shall be maintained in the facility. 

2.  DAILY             
INSPECTIONS 

i. 

Facility management should check daily, but not more than monthly, the loca-
tion and presence of appropriate extinguisher as per hazard and ensure that 
extinguishers are not shuffled from their suitable locations. 

ii.  Pressure gauge of extinguishers shall be verified to be in acceptable range. 

3.  MONTHLY     
INSPECTIONS 

i. 

Facility management shall check monthly the location and presence of appropri-
ate extinguisher as per hazard and ensure that extinguishers are not shuffled 
from their suitable locations. 

ii.  Pressure gauge of extinguishers shall be verified to be in acceptable range. 
iii.  Extinguishers shall be taken out from their hangers, cleaned and put back onto 

iv. 

i. 

4.  ANNUAL        
INSPECTIONS 

their hangers. 
If any of the extinguisher is taken out for repair or recharging, a replacement 
extinguisher of the same type and rating shall be installed in its place. 

Stored-pressure types containing a loaded stream agent shall be disassembled 
on an annual basis and subjected to complete maintenance. Prior to disassem-
bly, the fire extinguisher shall be fully discharged to check the operation of the 
discharge valve and pressure gauge. The loaded stream charge shall be per-
mitted to be recovered and re-used, provided it is subjected to agent analysis in 
accordance with manufacturer’s instructions.  

ii.  A conductivity test shall be conducted annually on all carbon dioxide hose as-

semblies. Hose assemblies found to be nonconductive shall be replaced. Carbon 
dioxide hose assemblies that pass a conductivity test shall have the test infor-
mation recorded on a suitable metallic label or equally durable material. 

iii.  Pressure regulators provided with wheeled-type fire extinguishers shall be test-

ed for outlet static pressure and flow rate in accordance with manufacturer’s 
instructions. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 379 of 1348 

 

Table 4.4: Inspection and Maintenance of Fire Extinguishers 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

5.  MAINTENANCE   1.  EQUIPMENT/CYLINDERS 

 
i. 

Extinguishers shall be in charged condition as per manufacturer’s specifica-
tions. 

ii.  All mechanical parts shall be inspected for smooth operation. 
iii.  Hydrostatic tests shall be conducted or extinguishers shall be replaced if there 

are signs of corrosion, mechanical damage, denting or abrasion. 

iv.  Damaged threads, damaged gauges, damaged seals and locks etc. shall be 

replaced. 

v.  Deformed nozzles, clogged nozzles, blocked nozzles shall be replaced/cleaned 

and ensured that it is in good working condition. 

vi.  Damaged, cracked or torn hose assemblies shall be replaced. 
vii.  Valves, gauges, pressure indicating devices shall be free of damage. if dam-

aged, shall be replaced. 

viii.  If puncture mechanism is damaged, dull, shall be replaced. 
ix.  Corroded, damaged carriage for trolley type extinguishers, shall be repaired or 

replaced. 

x.  Damaged, wheels, spokes, jammed wheels shall be replaced in wheel type 

extinguishers. 

xi.  Damaged gaskets, “O” rings and seals shall be replaced. 
xii.  Corroded, damaged gas tubes, siphon or pickup tube shall be replaced. 
 
2.  EXTINGUISHING AGENT 
 
i.  WATER: If improper fill level, refill. 
ii. 
iii.  CO2: If improper weight, recharge to proper weight. 
iv.  DRY CHEMICAL/DRY POWDER: If agent is contaminated or caking, empty, 

FOAM: If recharge date is due, empty, clean and recharge. 

clean and refill. If improper weight, refill to specifications. If cartridge is dam-
aged, tampered or punctured, replace cartridge. 

v.  WET CHEMICAL: IF improper weight, empty, clean and refill. if pressure not in 

acceptable range, re-pressurize.  

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 380 of 1348 

4.   Fire Extinguisher Material Test Standards and Approval. 

 

4.1. Acceptable Test Standards and criteria 
 

4.1.1.  All the Extinguishers, Extinguishing agents, Materials, Systems, Assemblies, Hose, 

Pipes, nozzles and fittings, equipment, Products and Accessories, referred to in this 
chapter shall be Listed, Approved and Registered by the Civil Defence Material Ap-
proval Department. 

 
4.1.2.  There is no year of edition mentioned against any test standards. It is the intent of 

Civil Defence to convey to the customers seeking laboratory tests and the test la-
boratories to follow the “LATEST EDITION OF THE TEST STANDARD, AS AND WHEN 
THEY ARE UPGRADED/REVISED/AMENDED, TO THE DATE.” 

4.1.3.  Portable Extinguisher (General) 
 

i.   ANSI/UL 711, Standard for Rating and Fire Testing of Fire Extinguishers 
ii.  ANSI/NFPA 10, Portable Fire Extinguishers 
iii. CAN/ULC-S508-M90, Standard for Rating and Fire Testing of Fire Extinguishers 

and Class D Extinguishing Media 

iv. EN 3-7 +A1, EN 3-8, EN 3-9, Portable fire extinguishers. Characteristics, perfor-

mance requirements and test methods. 

 

4.1.4.  Mobile (Wheeled/Trolley) Type Extinguisher 
 

 EN 1866-1, 2, 3. Mobile fire extinguishers Characteristics performance and test 
methods. 

i. 

 

4.1.5.  CO2 Extinguisher 
 

 ANSI/UL 154, Standard for Carbon Dioxide Fire Extinguishers;  

i. 
ii.   CAN/ULC-S503-M90, Standard for Carbon Dioxide Hand and Wheeled Fire Extin-

guishers. 

iii. EN 1866-1, Standard for Carbon Dioxide Wheeled Fire Extinguishers. 
iv. EN ISO 5923, Equipment for fire protection and fire fighting.  Fire extinguishing 

media.  Carbon  

 

6.1.6.  Dry Chemical/Dry Powder Extinguisher 
 

i.  UL 299, Standard for Dry Chemical Fire Extinguishers; 
ii.  CAN/ULC-S504-M86, Standard for Dry Chemical and Dry Powder Hand and 

Wheeled Fire Extinguishers. 

iii.  EN 615, Fire protection, fire extinguishing media specifications for powder 

(other than class D powders) 

 
 
 

 

 

  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 381 of 1348 

 

4.1.7.  Water Type Extinguisher 
 

i.   ANSI/UL 626, Standard for Water based Fire Extinguishers; 
ii.   CAN/ULC-S507-92, Standard for 9 Liter Stored Pressure Water Type Fire Extin-

guishers. 

 

4.1.8.  Foam Type Extinguisher 
 

i.   ANSI/UL 8, Standard for Foam Fire Extinguishers. 
 

4.1.9.  Halocarbon Type Extinguisher 
 

i.   ANSI/UL 2129, Standard for Halocarbon Agent Fire Extinguishers 
 

4.1.10. Fire Blankets 
 

i.   EN 1869, Standard for Fire Blanket 
ii.   BS 7944, Type 1 heavy duty fire blankets and type 2 heavy duty heat protective 

blankets. 

 
 

 

 

  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 382 of 1348Chapter 5 
EXIT SIGNS 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 383 of 1348In this Chapter:
 Specifications of exit signs and directional markings.

 Location of exit and directional markings. 

 Standard format of the “Emergency Evacuation Plans”.
 

Intent of the Chapter: 

• 

• 

To provide clear and visible exit signs and directional marking in a facility to 
enable people to find exits swiftly and easily during emergencies. 
To standardize the exit signs, directional signs and emergency evacuation plans. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 384 of 1348 

In this Chapter : 

Intent of the Chapter 

  Specifications of Exit Signs and 

Directional Markings 

  Location of Exit and Directional 

markings 

  Standard format of the 

“Emergency Evacuation Plans” 

  To provide clear and visible exit signs and directional 

marking in a facility to enable people to find exits swiftly 
and easily during emergencies. 

  To standardize the Exit Signs, Directional Signs and 

Emergency Evacuation Plans. 

1. Definitions 

1.1. General 

It is a mandatory requirement from Civil Defence. 

It is a suggested requirement recommended by Civil Defence but not mandatory. 

Approved and registered by individual Emirates’ Civil Defence material department. 

The SI unit of illumination equal to a luminous flux of 1 lumen per square meter.  
1 lux = 0.0929 foot-candle  

1.1.1.  Shall  
 
 
1.1.2.  Should 
 
 
1.1.3.  Listed 
 
 
1.1.4.  Lux  
 
 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 385 of 1348