| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1 of 1348| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 2 of 1348| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 3 of 1348| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 4 of 1348| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 5 of 1348| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 6 of 1348| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 7 of 1348| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 8 of 1348| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 9 of 1348| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 10 of 1348| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 11 of 1348| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 12 of 1348| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 13 of 1348| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 14 of 1348| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 15 of 1348| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 16 of 1348| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 17 of 1348Content
 

0

1 

2 

Introduction 

First Chapter 

Second Chapter 

1- Copyrights. 
2- Disclaimer and responsibility. 
3- Introduction. 
4- Intent. 
5- Code use. 
6- Acknowledgements. 
7- Adherence to best practices. 
8-  Environmental management and 

sustainability. 

9- Occupational Safety and Health 

Construction 

1- Definitions.
 
2- Construction requirements.
 
3- Firestopping System.
 
4- Cladding and Facade systems for 

buildings.
 
5- Glazing systems.
 
6- Roofing systems.
 

FIRE SERVICE VEHICLE 
AND PERSONNEL 
ACCESSIBILITY 

1-Definitions 
2-  Fire Access for Fire Vehicles and 

Firefighters 

3- Access of Fireboats to Waterfront 
4-  Civil Defense Fire Apparatus 

Specifications 

5. Fire Stations 

3 

4 

5 

Chapter 3 

Chapter 4 

Chapter 5 

Means of Egress 

FIRE EXTINGUISHERS 

EXIT SIGNS 

1- Definitions 
2- Means of Egress 
3- Components of Means of Egress 
4- Capacity of Means of Egress 
5- Occupancy Specific Requirements 
6-  Design, Installation, Inspection and 

Maintenance of Means of Egress 

7-  7. Material Test Standards, Approval 

and registration 

1- Definitions 
2- Fire Extinguishers 
3-  Design, Installation, Inspection and 
Maintenance of Fire Extinguishers 

4-  Fire Extinguisher Material Test 

Standards and Approval 

1- Definitions 
2- Exist Signs 
3- Exit Signs and Directional Signs 
4-  Exit Sign Material Test Standards 

and Approval 

 
 
 
  

  

  

  

  

 

 
 
 
 
  

  

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
  

  

  

 

  
 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 
  

  

  

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 
  

  

  

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 
  
  

 
  

  

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 18 of 1348 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

  

 
  

 

Content
 

6	

7 

8 

Chapter 6 

Chapter 7 

Chapter 8 

EMERGENCY LIGHTING 
1- Definitions 
2- Emergency Lighting 
3- Emergency Lighting Systems  
4-  Selection and Application of 
Emergency Lighting Systems 

5-  Design, Installation, Inspection 
and Maintenance of Exit Signs 
and Directional Signs 

6-  Emergency Lighting Systems 

Acceptance Test 

7-  Inspection and Maintenance of 

Emergency Lighting 

8-  8. Emergency Lighting Material 

Test Standards and Approval 

9 

EMERGENCY VOICE 
EVACUATION SYSTEMS 
1- Definitions 
2- Intent 
3-  Application of Emergency Voice 
Evacuation System and Two-way 
Telephone Communication System 

4-  Emergency Voice Evacuation or 
Communication System (EVC) 
Acceptance Test 

5-  Emergency Voice Evacuation 

System and Two-way Telephone 
System Material Test Standards 
and Approval 

10 

FIRE DETECTION AND 
ALARM SYSTEM 

1- Definitions 
2- Detection and Alarm Systems 
3- Types of Fire Detection Systems 
4-  Application of Fire Detection and 

Alarm Systems 

5-  Design, Installation, Inspection 

and Maintenance of Fire 
Detection and Alarm Systems 

6-  Material Test Standards, Approval 

and registration 
7- Roofing System 

11 

 

 

 

Chapter 9 

Chapter 10 

Chapter 11 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
  

    

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
  

  

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 
  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

FIRE PROTECTION 
SYSTEMS 

1- Definitions 
2- Fire Protection Systems 
3- Details of Fire Protection Systems 
4- Application of Fire Protection Systems 
5-  Design, Installation, Inspection and 

Maintenance of Fire Protection Systems 
6-  Material Test Standards, Approval 

and registration 

SMOKE CONTROL AND SMOKE 
MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS 
1- Definitions 
2- Smoke Control Systems 
3-  Application of Smoke Control and 

Smoke Management Systems 

4-  Design, Installation, Inspection, Acceptance 
and Maintenance of Smoke Control Systems 
5-  Acceptance and Maintenance of Smoke 

Control Systems 

6-  Smoke Control System Material Test 

Standards and Approval 

LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM 
GAS CODE OF PRACTICE 
1- Definitions 
2-  LPG Systems Design and Installation 
3-  LPG Systems Used for Flame 

Shows in Front of an Audience 

4- LP Liquid Transfer operations 
5-  Inspection and Maintenance of 

LPG Installations 

6-  LPG Systems Material Test 

Standards and Approval 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 19 of 1348Content
 

12 

13 

14 

Chapter 12 

Chapter 13 

Chapter 14 

FIRE AND LIFE SAFETY 
 
DURING CONSTRUCTION 
 
AND MAINTENANCE 

1- Definitions 
2- Fire Safety During Construction, 

 
Modification, Alteration and 
Demolition 
 
Construction, Modification, 
Alteration and Demolition 

3- Application of Fire Safety During 

UTILITY OCCUPANCIES 

1- Definitions 
2- Fire and Life Safety of Utility 

 
Occupancies 

FLAMMABLE LIQUID 
USAGE 

1- Definitions 
2- Flammable and Combustible Liquids 
3- Motor Fuel Dispensing Facilities 
4- Operational Requirements 
5- Emergency Management System (EMS) 
 
6- Flammable and Combustible Liquid 
Storage Material Test Standards and 
Approvals 

15 

16 

17 

Chapter 15 

Chapter 16 

Chapter 17 

ACCESSIBILITY 

DIRECT ALARM SYSTEM 

1- Definitions 
2- General 

1- Definitions 
2- Scope 
3- Details of Accessibility Features 
4- Application of Accessibility 
Features 
5- Emergency Evacuation Strategies 
for Physically Disabled 

RISK ASSESSMENT 
METHODOLOGY 

1- Definitions 
2- Risk Assessment (RA) Studies and 

 
Reports 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 
 
 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 20 of 1348Content
 

18 

19 

20 

 

 

 

 
  

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Chapter 18 

Chapter 19 

Chapter 20 

RESPONSIBILITIES OF 
STAKEHOLDERS 

1- Definitions 
2- Responsibilities of Stakeholders 

EMERGENCY ACTION 
PLAN AND EVACUATION 
PROCEDURES 

1- Definitions 
2-  Emergency Action Plan, 
Evacuation and Fire Drill 

3-  Requirements for Emergency 

Action Plans 

4- Emergency Evacuation Drills (Fire Drills) 

S1 

S2 

Marina 

1- Definitions
 
2-  Marinas (Marina, Boat yards, Marine) 

Terminals and Terminal Yards 

3- Construction of Marinas 
4-  Fire Service Vehicle, Fireboat and 
.Personnel Accessibility 
5- Operational Requirements for 
Marina Management 
6- Storage Requirements 
7- Fire Protection System 
Requirements 
8- Life Safety System Requirements 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
  

ANNEXURE 1 

ANNEXURE 2 

Common Questions 

1- General 
2- Construction 
3- Exits 
4- Fire and Life Safety Systems 

DRAWING 
SUBMISSION 
REQUIREMENTS 

1-  DRAWING SUBMISSION 

REQUIREMENTS 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 21 of 1348Chapter 1 
CONSTRUCTION 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 22 of 1348In this Chapter:
 Building construction requirements.

 Fire rating of structural elements based on area and height.

 Cladding, roofing, and glazing.

 Civil Defence requirements for construction materials.
 

Intent of the Chapter: 

• 

• 

• 

To  ensure  life  safety  of  the  occupants  of  buildings  and  structures  through 
regulating design, construction and materials used in the construction. 
To identify structural fire ratings, compartmentation, height and area restrictions, 
distance  between  adjacent  buildings  to  ensure  the  effect  of  fire  hazard  to 
occupants and to the neighboring buildings and structures is minimized. 
To restrict fire spread outside and within building by regulating exterior and 
interior finish material quality. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 23 of 1348 

In this Chapter : 

  Building Construction 

requirements. 

  Fire rating of Structural 

elements based on area and 
height. 

  Cladding, Roofing, Glazing 

  Civil Defence requirements for 

construction materials. 

1. Definitions 
   

1.1. Construction 

Intent of the Chapter  

  To ensure Life Safety of the occupants of buildings and 
structures through regulating design, construction and 
materials used in the construction. 

  To identify Structural Fire ratings, Compartmentation, 
height and area restrictions, distance between adjacent 
buildings to ensure the effect of Fire hazard to occupants 
and to the neighboring buildings and structures is 
minimized. 

  To restrict Fire spread outside and within building by 

regulating Exterior and Interior Finish Material quality. 

It is a mandatory requirement from Civil Defence 

It is a suggested requirement recommended by Civil Defence but not mandatory. 

Approved and registered by individual Emirates’ Civil Defence material department. 

 
1.1.1.  Shall  
 
 
1.1.2.  Should 
 
 
1.1.3.  Listed 
 
 
1.1.4.  Building Area 
 

The total area within surrounding exterior walls (or exterior walls and fire walls) exclusive 
of vent shafts and courts. Areas of the building not provided with surrounding walls shall 
be included in the building areas if such areas are included within the horizontal projec-
tion of the roof or floor above. 

 
1.1.5.   Control Area 
 

A building or portion of a building within which hazardous materials are allowed to be 
stored, dispensed, used, or handled in quantities not exceeding the maximum allowable 
quantities 

 
1.1.6.  Maximum Allowable Quantity per Control Area (MAQ) 
 
 
1.1.7.  Fire Area 
 

Maximum quantity of hazardous material allowed to be in a control area. 

An area separated from rest of the building by fire walls, fire barriers or combination 
thereof. 

 
1.1.8.  Gross Floor Area 
 

The area of a floor within the inside perimeter of the exterior walls of the building, with 
no deductions for hallways, stairs, closets, thickness of interior walls, columns, elevator 
and building services shafts, or other features, but excluding floor openings associated 
with atriums and communicating spaces. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 24 of 13481.1.9.  Net Floor Area  
 

The area of a floor within the inside perimeter of the exterior walls of the building, or the 
outside walls and fire walls of a building, or outside and/or inside walls that bound an oc-
cupancy or incidental use area requiring the occupant load to be calculated using net 
floor area under consideration with deductions for hallways, stairs, closets, thickness of 
interior walls, columns, or other features. 

 
1.1.10.  Gross Leasable Area 
 

The area of tenant occupancy measured from the centerline of joint partitions to the out-
side of the tenant walls. 

 
1.1.11.  Hazardous Area 
 

An area in a building or structure with a greater Fire Hazard than the normal hazard to 
general occupancy of that building or structure. 

 
1.1.12.  Area of Refuge 
 

An area that is either  
a.  A storey in a building fully protected automatic sprinkler system and has not less 

than two accessible rooms or spaces separated from each other by smoke-resisting 
partitions. OR 

b.  A space located in a path of travel leading to a public way that is protected from the 
effects of fire, either by means of separation from other spaces in the same building 
or by virtue of location, thereby permitting a delay in egress travel from any level. 

 
1.1.13.  Fire Door Assembly 
 

An assembly of door leaf(s), a frame, hardware, and other accessories that together pro-
vide a specific degree of fire protection to the opening. Fire Door assembly shall be tested 
and certified to declare its fire rating. 

 
1.1.14.  Fire Window Assembly 
 

A window assembly or glass block assembly having a fire protection rating. The same shall 
be tested and certified to declare its fire rating. 

 
1.1.15.  Atrium 
 

A large-volume space created by a floor opening or series of floor openings connecting 
two or more storeys or exceeds 15 m in height from finished floor, that is covered at the 
top of the series of openings and is used for purposes other than an enclosed stairway, an 
elevator, hoistway, an escalator opening or as a utility shaft used for plumbing, electrical, 
air-conditioning, or communications facilities 

 
1.1.16.  Fire Barrier 
 

A continuous membrane or a membrane with discontinuities created by protected open-
ings with a minimum of 1 hour fire protection rating, where such membrane is designed 
and constructed to limit the spread of fire. Fire barriers are to be continuous from floor to 
underside of the floor above or fire rated ceiling and from the inside face of exterior to 
another exterior wall or other fire barrier with equal or greater fire rating  

 
 
 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 25 of 1348 

1.1.17.  Smoke Barrier and Smoke Partition 
 

A continuous membrane or a membrane with discontinuities created by protected open-
ings with a minimum of 1 hour fire rating designed and constructed to limit the spreading 
and movement of smoke. 

 
1.1.18.  Fire Protection Rating 
 

The period of time that an opening protective will maintain the ability to confine a fire 
and heat. Ratings are stated in hours or minutes. 

 
1.1.19.  Fire Resistance Rating 
 

The period of time a building element, component or assembly maintains the ability to 
confine a fire, continues to perform a given structural function, or both. 

 
1.1.20.  Fire Wall 
 

A specified fire-resistance-rated wall having protected openings, which restricts the 
spread of fire, heat and extends continuously from the foundation to or through the roof, 
with sufficient structural stability under fire conditions without collapse of the wall. 
 

1.1.21.  High Challenge Fire Wall (HC Fire Wall) 
 

A wall used to separate buildings or subdivide a building with high fire challenge occupan-
cies, having enhanced fire resistance ratings and enhanced opening protection to prevent 
the spread of fire, and having structural stability 
 

1.1.22.   Smoke Compartment 
 

A space within a building enclosed by smoke barriers on all sides, including the top and 
bottom. 

 
1.1.23.  Fire Compartment 
 

A space within a building enclosed by specific fire rated Fire Walls, fire rated opening pro-
tective on all sides, including the top and bottom. 

 
1.1.24.  Basement 
 

Any storey of a building wholly or partly below grade plane that is not considered the first 
storey above grade plane. 

 
1.1.25.  Existing Building 
 

A building erected or officially approved by Civil Defence and authorized prior to the 
effective date of the adoption of this edition of the UAE Fire and Life Safety Code of Prac-
tice. 

 
1.1.26.  Structural Element 
 

The columns and girders, beams, trusses, joists, braced frames, moment-resistant frames, 
and vertical and lateral resisting elements, and other framing members that are designed 
to carry any portion of the dead or live load and lateral forces, that are essential to the 
stability of the building or structure. 

 
1.1.27.  Building Height 
 

The vertical distance from the grade plane to the average elevation of the highest roof 
surface. 

 
 
 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 26 of 1348 

1.1.28.  Horizontal Separation  
 

The width of the permanent open space as measured horizontally between a building ex-
terior wall and the adjacent property line or the centerline of a facing street, alley, or pub-
lic way, or to an imaginary line drawn between exterior walls of adjacent buildings on the 
same lot. 

 
1.1.29.  Combustible Material 
 

A material that, in the form in which it is used and under the conditions anticipated, will 
ignite, burn, support combustion or release flammable vapors when subjected to heat 
and fire. 

 
1.1.30.  Non-Combustible Material 
 

A material that, in the form in which it is used and under the conditions anticipated, will 
not ignite, burn, support combustion or release flammable vapors when subjected to heat 
and fire. And a non-combustible material is certified as “passes” when tested as per ASTM 
136, Standard Test Method for Behavior of Materials in a Vertical Tube Furnace at      750 
0C. 

 
1.1.31.  Limited Combustible Material 
 

A material which does not comply to “Non-Combustible Material” definition. And the Ma-
terial in the form in which it is used when tested as per NFPA 259, Standard test Method 
for Potential Heat of Building Material, exhibits a potential heat value not exceeding 3500 
Btu/lb. (8141 Kj/kg). 

 
1.1.32.  Partition 
 

A nonstructural interior wall that spans horizontally or vertically from support to support. 
The supports may be the basic building frame, subsidiary structural members, or other 
portions of the partition system. 

 
1.1.33.   Swimming Pool 
 

Any constructed pool intended for swimming or diving, permanent or non-portable, that 
is over 610 mm in depth, has a surface area exceeding 23 m2, or has a volume over 3250 
gal. 

 
1.1.34.  Property Line 
 
 
1.1.35.  ASTM E 84 or UL 723 – Flame Spread Classification - Class A  

Line dividing one lot from another, or from a street or other public space. 

In accordance with ASTM E 84 or UL 723, Class A finishes shall be those finishes with a 
flame spread of 0–25 and smoke development of 0–450 and shall include any material 
classified at 25 or less on the flame spread test scale and 450 or less on the smoke test 
scale. Any element thereof, when so tested, shall not continue to propagate fire.  
 

    1.1.36.   ASTM E 84 or UL 723 - Flame Spread Classification -  Class B  

In accordance with ASTM E 84 or UL 723, Class B finishes shall be those finishes with a 
flame spread of 26–75 and smoke development of 0–450 and shall include any material 
classified at more than 25 but not more than 75 on the flame spread test scale and 450 or 
less on the smoke test scale.  

 

     

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 27 of 13481.1.37.    ASTM E 84 or UL 723 - Flame Spread Classification -  Class C  

In accordance with ASTM E 84 or UL 723, Class C Interior Wall and Ceiling Finish. Class C 
interior wall and ceiling finishes shall be those finishes with a flame spread of 76–200 and 
smoke development of 0–450 and shall include any material classified at more than 75 
but not more than 200 on the flame spread test scale and 450 or less on the smoke test 
scale. 

 
1.1.38.  BS Flame Spread Classification - Class 1 and Class 0  
 

A Class 1 classification is assigned by testing in accordance with BS 476: Part 7. This speci-
fies a method of test for measuring the lateral spread of flame along the surface of a 
specimen of a product orientated in the vertical position. A Class 1 classification is the 
best of four performance levels defined within the Standard. A Class 0 classification is as-
signed to Class 1 products which have a fire propagation index (I) of not more than 12 and 
a sub-index (i1) of not more than 6 when tested in accordance with BS 476: Part 6.  

 
1.1.39.  EN/DIN Combustibility and Flame Spread Classification – Class B or B1  

 
 

i. Class B1 according to DIN 4102  
ii. Class B-s1, d0 or B-s2, d0 according to EN 13501-1,  
The materials tested to these standards are difficult to ignite and fire must extinguish it-
self when source of the fire is removed. They include materials such as wood treated with 
fire retardant and some rigid foam plastics.  

 
1.1.40.   EN/DIN Combustibility and Flame Spread Classification – Class A2  

 

i. Class A2 as per DIN 4102  
ii. Class A2-s2, d0 as per EN 13501-1  
These materials are non-combustible with combustible organic components. This catego-
ry includes materials like gypsum plasterboards (with sealed surface), polystyrene con-
crete and mineral wool. Under conditions of fully developed fire, these products will not 
contribute to fire load and fire growth.  

 
1.1.41.   ADVERTISING SIGNBOARDS  
 

Any letter, figure, character, mark, plane, point, marquee sign, design, poster, pictorial, 
picture, stroke, stripe, line, trademark, reading matter or illuminated service, which shall 
be constructed, placed, attached, painted, erected, fastened or manufactured in any man-
ner whatsoever, so that the same shall be used for the attraction of the public to any 
place, subject, person, firm, corporation, public performance, article, machine or mer-
chandise, whatsoever, which is displayed in any manner outdoors or indoors. 

  

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 28 of 1348 

1.2. Fire Stopping 

 
 
1.2.1.  Firestop 
 

It is a general term for a passive fire protection system of various materials and compo-
nents that are used to seal openings and joints in fire resistive wall and/or floor assem-
blies in a way that will preserve the full fire resistance rating of the assembly. 

 
1.2.2.  Firestop System  
 

The use of a specific Firestop material or combination of materials around a specific pene-
trant(s) or into a specific joint in conjunction with a specific wall and/or floor construction 
type.  

Any bearing or non-bearing wall or floor that has an hourly fire and smoke rating.  

The term is used to denote an opening for penetrations that pass through both sides of a 
vertical or horizontal fire resistance-rated assembly, through a fire rated wall or floor 
through which passes a mechanical, electrical, piping, structural, communication or other 
device.  

 
1.2.3.   Barrier  
 
 
1.2.4.   Through-penetration  
 

 
1.2.5.   Membrane-penetration  
 
 
1.2.6.   Fire Resistive Joint  
 

Any penetration through a fire-rated wall that breaches the barrier.  

An arrangement with Fire resistive material for any gap or opening, whether static or dy-
namic, between two fire-rated barriers including where the top of a wall meets a floor; 
wall edge to wall edge configurations; floor edge to floor edge configurations; floor edge 
to wall configurations.  

 
1.2.7.   Perimeter Barrier  

Any gap, joint, or opening, whether static or dynamic, between a fire-rated floor assembly 
and a rated and/or non-rated exterior wall assembly. A single or combination of materials 
are used to create a firestop assembly at the perimeter gap between a fire resistance rat-
ed floor assembly and a non-rated wall assembly, capable of preventing the spread of 
heat, fire, gases, smoke or other defined hazards through the internal opening in the wall 
and floor assembly. 
 

1.2.8.   Curtain-wall  

A non-load-bearing external wall attached to a framed structure. It’s usually a glass and/
or metal profile exterior wall assembly with all the associated accessories to provide an 
aesthetic exterior building envelope. 
 

1.2.9.   Dynamic Joint  

The linear opening or gap between adjacent fire resistant structures designed to allow 
independent movement of a building. A joint is designed into structures to accommodate 
movement in any plane caused by thermal, wind, seismic or other loading forces.  
 

1.2.10.   Static Joint  

The linear opening or gap between adjacent fire resistant structures that would not ac-
commodate movement of a building.  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 29 of 13481.2.11.  ‗F‘ Rating  
 

The time, stated in hours, that a Firestop system will prevent the passage of flame 
through an opening and not permit the projection of a water stream through a fire rated 
assembly. Firestop systems and devices shall have an F rating of at least 1 hour, but not 
less than the required fire resistance rating of the fire barrier penetrated, as determined 
by NFPA 251, ASTM E-814, UL 1479, UL 2079, FM 4990, BS EN1366-3 or other equivalent 
standards.  

 
1.2.12.   ‗T‘ Rating  
 

The period of time (in hours or 15 minute increments) a Firestop system has been shown 
capable of keeping the unexposed surface of the Firestop system and/or any penetrating 
items from exceeding a 3250F (1810C) above ambient temperature rise. This T rating also 
includes passage of F rating requirements for the same time period as determined by 
ASTM E 814, ASTM E-119, UL 1479, FM 4990, BS EN1366-3 or other equivalent standards.  

 
1.2.13.   ‗L‘ Rating  
 

The amount of air leakage through the fire rated assembly, determined by applying speci-
fied air pressure (0.30” water column) across the surface of the test assembly. The rating 
is expressed in cubic feet per minute (CFM) leakage per square foot of opening, as de-
tailed in UL 1479, UL 2079, BS EN1366-3 or equivalent standards. An L rating is a measure 
of the ability of a fire-resistive assembly to prevent cold and warm smoke passage 
through fire stops, joint seals and other resistance rated assemblies, obtained at ambient 
or elevated temperatures. 

 
1.2.14.   ‗W‘ Rating  
 

W rating determines the capability of the firestop system to maintain watertightness of 
the penetration through a floor or wall construction at ambient air conditions under 3 ft. 
of water pressure head (1.3 psi) for a period of 72 hours. 

 
1.2.15.   Tested and Listed Assembly  
 

Tested and listed assemblies are the systems that are successfully tested as assemblies to 
the test criteria mentioned in section 7 by Civil Defence listed laboratories and certified 
by Civil Defence listed certification bodies. The supplier, manufacturer of such tested and 
certified assemblies shall be listed and approved by Civil Defence. 

 
1.2.16.  Engineering Judgments (EJ‘s)  
 

An evaluation of the field conditions which do not conform to or deviate from an existing 
tested and listed assemblies. Engineering Judgment (EJ) shall be issued essentially by the 
original testing laboratory/Certification body that listed the system or registered Fire Con-
sultant, Fire Protection Engineer, or an independent certification agency that provides 
certification services for such systems. EJ’s are not to be used as a substitute for a classi-
fied system if it exists. EJ’s, when considered, shall be approved by Civil Defence.  

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 30 of 1348 

1.3. EIFS (Exterior Insulation and Finish Systems) and  

      ETICS (Exterior Thermal Insulation Composite Systems) 

 
 
1.3.1.  Adhesive  
 
 
1.3.2.  Aesthetic Reveal  
 

A material used to attach the insulation board to the substrate.  

A groove cut into the insulation board, which serves the function of decoration and/or 
provides a starting or stopping point for application of the finish coat.  

 
1.3.3.  Backer Rod  
 

A closed cell foam rod installed in a joint that is to receive sealant. Its purpose is to con-
trol joint depth and configuration as well as prevent three-sided adhesion.  

 
1.3.4.  Backwrap  
 

The practice of attaching a strip of reinforcing mesh to the wall substrate, adhesively or 
mechanically attaching insulation board to the substrate then wrapping the mesh around 
to the face of the insulation board and encapsulating it in the base coat on the return 
edges and face of the insulation board.  

 
1.3.5.  Base Coat  
 

A material applied to the face of the insulation board that is used to encapsulate the rein-
forcing mesh.  

 
1.3.6.  Brown Coat  
 

The second coat of Portland cement plaster installed in a conventional hard coat stucco 
system.  

 
1.3.7.  Cold Joint  
 

The visible junction in a finish coat. It occurs when a wet edge is not maintained. This can 
typically be avoided with proper scaffold, sufficient manpower and aesthetic reveal/ 
joints.  

Designed to relieve stresses of both expansion and contraction in large stuccoed areas.  

 
1.3.8.  Control Joint  
 
 
1.3.9.  Cornerite (Strip lath) 
 
 
1.3.10.  Curing  
 
 
1.3.11.  Drainage  
 
 
1.3.12.  Durability  
 

A strip of painted or galvanized Diamond Mesh Lath used as reinforcement.  

A chemical process through which the properties of a material are developed.  

The collection and discharge of water by gravity flow.  

The capability of the system to maintain serviceability over a specific period of time.  

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 31 of 13481.3.13.  Edge wrap  
 

A method used to protect the exposed edges of the insulation board with reinforcing 
mesh and base coat.  

 
1.3.14.  EIFS  
 

Exterior Insulation and Finish System. A non-load bearing exterior wall cladding system 
consisting of a thermal insulation board, adhesively and/or mechanically attached to the 
substrate, base coat with reinforced fiberglass mesh and a textured finish coat.  

A method implemented to encapsulate the fiberglass reinforcing mesh in the base coat.  

 
1.3.15.  Embed  
 
 
1.3.16.  EPS (Insulation Board) 
 

A preformed insulating material of a specific type and density that functions to reduce the 
heat flow through the wall and provides the surface to receive the base coat.  

 
1.3.17.  ETICS  
 

External Thermal Insulation Composite Systems. A non-load bearing exterior wall cladding 
system consisting of a thermal insulation board, adhesively and/or mechanically attached 
to the substrate, base coat with reinforced fiberglass mesh and a textured finish coat.  

 
1.3.18.  Expansion Joint  
 

A structural separation between similar and/or dissimilar building components that al-
lows independent movement of the components while preventing damage to the assem-
bly.  

A ready-to-use adhesive base coat or finish coat material prepared by the manufacturer.  

Plastic washers used in conjunction with non-corrosive screws to attach insulation to sub-
strate and/or framing.  

 
1.3.21.  Field Mixing  
 

A material prepared by the user in the field that is mixed with other components and/or 
water.  

 
1.3.19.  Factory Mixed  
 
 
1.3.20.  Fasteners  
 

 
1.3.22.  Finish Coat  
 
 
1.3.23.  Flashing  
 

A decorative and protective textured coating applied over the dry reinforced base coat.  

A non-corrosive material of metal or plastic at a systems termination or interface with an 
opposing cladding component used to drain moisture to the face of the wall assembly.  

 
1.3.24.  Framing Member  
 

Studs, joists, runners (tracks), bridging, bracing, and related accessories manufactured or 
supplied in wood or hot or cold-formed steel.  

 
1.3.25.  Lamina  
 

The layer comprised of the base coat, reinforcing mesh and the finish coat.  

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 32 of 13481.3.26.  Penetration  
 

Any location in an EIF System where an object passes through all components of the sys-
tem such as a window, door, light box, etc.)  

 
1.3.27.  Primer  
 

A material used to prepare a surface for application of EIFS to the substrate or of the fin-
ish coat to the base coat.  

 
1.3.28.  Reinforced Base Coat  
 

A base coat in which an open-weave glass-fiber fabric has been encapsulated to provide 
reinforcement.  

 
1.3.29.  Reinforcing Mesh  
 

Open-weave glass-fiber fabric treated for compatibility with other materials of the system 
that functions to strengthen the system.  

 
1.3.30.  Sealant  
 

Installed with or without a backer rod for the purpose to allow thermal expansion and 
contraction of dissimilar cladding components to prevent moisture penetration.  

 
1.3.31.  Sealant System  
 

The use of primer, backer rod or bond breaker in conjunction with the installation of seal-
ant.  

The first coat of Portland cement stucco installed over metal wire or lath.  

The surface over which the EIFS/ETICS or weather resistive barrier is applied.  

 
1.3.32.  Scratch Coat  
 
 
1.3.33.  Substrate  
 
 
1.3.34.  Weather/Moisture Barrier  
 
 
1.3.35.  Wet Edge  
 
 
1.3.36.  Wrapping  
 

The surface over which the EIFS or weather resistive barrier is applied.  

The leading edge of a continuously applied wet state material.  

The process of totally encapsulating all EPS to seal and strengthen the system by bringing 
reinforcing mesh around the system terminations, embedded in base coat. Wrapping is 
also referred to as back wrap or edge wrap.  

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 33 of 1348 

1.4. Glazing 

 
1.4.1.  Glazing  
 
 
1.4.2.  Fire resistant glazing  
 

A wall, floor, ceiling or roofing ‘system’ that contains glass as one of its components.  

Glazing that provides a physical barrier to elements of fire including flame and hot gases, 
or flame and hot gases and heat and in addition the prevention of increase in tempera-
ture beyond a certain degree on the non-fireside of the glazing.  

 
1.4.3.  Fire resistance, integrity only (E)  
 

A glazing that is required to resist the passage of flames and hot gasses and limit the size 
of openings developing, for a specified period of time, defined in minutes.  

 
1.4.4.  Fire resistance, integrity with radiation limitation (EW)  
 

A glazing that meets the integrity criteria and is required to limit heat radiation below 
15kW/m2 from its non-fire side, for a specified period of time, defined in minutes.  

 
1.4.5.  Fire resistance, integrity with insulation (EI)  
 

A glazing that meets the integrity criteria and is required to restrict the rise in average 
surface temperature of the non-fireside of the glazing beyond 140°C above the initial sur-
face temperature or to a maximum surface temperature rise up to 180°C (whichever is 
lower), for a specified period of time, defined in minutes.  

 
1.4.6.  Fire rated Glazing systems defined as per American standards  
 

As per American standards in areas where there are automated sprinkler system and in 
areas that will be exposed to fireman’s hose must pass the hose stream test. This tests 
the ability of the glazing system to retain its integrity when a jet of water is blasted on the 
glazing surface (fire-side or non-fire side). The specimen should not develop openings that 
permit projection of water from the stream from one side to the other. The glazing as-
sembly shall remain in the opening and shall not loosen or separate from fastenings, or 
develop any through openings. Since the test specimen is subjected to pressure of water 
from the exposed side the test result covers the unexposed side. 

  
1.4.7.a  Fire protection glazing as defined in NFPA 257  
 

As per NFPA 252, NFPA 257, UL 10B, UL 10C and UL 9, only glazing system integrity per-
formance is assessed. Glazing that is not designed to limit the temperature rise on the 
non-exposed surface but has to withstand the impact of the hose stream test; radiation 
on the non-fire side can be measured whenever required.  

 
1.4.7.b.  Fire resistance rated glazing as defined in NFPA 251  
 

As per NFPA 251, UL 263, or ASTM E119, The conditions of acceptance of these standards 
include system integrity and temperature insulation on non-fire side.   

 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 34 of 1348 

1.4.8.  Fire-rated glazing systems  
 

Fire rated Glazing Systems are usually composed of following three main components 
that must work together during an occurrence of fire:  

 

a.  Fire-rated frames–typically steel, timber or aluminium  
 
b.  Fire-rated glass – examples are:  

i.  Glass ceramics  
ii.  Borosilicate glass  
iii. Soda-lime silicate glass (mostly unidirectional protection only)  
iv. Resin or polyvinyl butyral laminated glass  
v.  Gel-filled laminated glass  
f. Intumescent-filled laminated glass  

 
1.4.9.  Fire-rated accessories and hardware (or ironmongery).  
 
 

These include (but are not limited to):  

a. Fire-rated glazing seals and sealants  
b. Types and profiles of fire-rated glazing beads and modes of fixing  
c. Fire-rated fixings and anchoring  
d. Fire-rated ceramic tapes  
e. Fire-rated intumescent strips  
f. Fire-rated infills for frames / doors  
g. Fire-rated gaskets  
h. Fire-rated setting blocks  

1.4.10.  Critical location  
 

A location where breakage must be considered and safety glass or safety plastics must be 
used.  

 
1.4.11.  Safety glass  
 

 
 

A glass configuration that provides the required level of Strength, protection and ensures 
less danger when breaks. (See section 5.4.2.). A safety glass is not a fire rated glass.  
Examples of safety glass types are:  

a. Safety wired.  
b. Thermally toughened safety glass  
c. Laminated safety glass  
d. Adhesive backed polymeric filmed safety glass  
e. Safety backed mirrors  
f. Safety backed painted glass  

1.4.12.  Safety plastic  
 

A plastic glazing sheet material that provides the required level of protection when con-
sidering the criteria stated in See section 5.4.2.). The breakage characteristics of plastics 
glazing sheet materials vary because of differences in their chemical composition, or 
structure. Two or more different materials may be combined to provide composite prod-
ucts. The three types of plastics glazing sheet materials most commonly used for external 
and internal glazing are as follows:  

 

 

 

a. Polycarbonate (PC).  
b. Polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA).  
c. Polyvinyl chloride (PVCu).  

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 35 of 1348 

1.4.13.  Modes of Breakage  

Type A: Cracks appear forming separate fragments with sharp edges, some of which are 
large. This is the mode of breakage typical of annealed glass. This is not consistent with 
safety glass.  
 
Type B: Cracks appear, but the fragments hold together and do not separate. This is the 
mode of breakage typical of laminated glass. This may be typical of safety glass but spe-
cific precautions should be taken when used overhead (See section 5.4.4.).  
 
Type C: Disintegration occurs, leading to a large number of small particles that are rela-
tively harmless. This is the mode of breakage typical of toughened (fully tempered) glass. 
This is consistent with safety glass.  
 

1.4.14.  Annealed glass  

The basic glass (e.g. float, patterned) from which most other glasses referred to in this 
annex are processed. If annealed glass is broken and pieces are displaced, the resulting 
glass edges will be sharp. Annealed glass has a mode of breakage classification of Type A. 
Annealed glass is not recommended for external use in the UAE due to its propensity for 
thermal cracking.  
 

1.4.15.  Wired glass  

Glass with steel wire cast into the body of the glass. If wired glass is broken and the pieces 
are held together by the wires, penetration is unlikely. However, if the wires are broken 
and the material is penetrated, the resulting glass edges will be sharp. Wired glass has a 
mode of breakage classification of Type B.  
 

1.4.16.  Laminated glass  

A glass configuration using more than one layer of material bonded together. The 
breakage characteristics will be similar to those of the types of glass used in its construc-
tion, but the pieces will remain substantially adhered to the interlayer. Depending on the 
type and thickness of the interlayer, the broken glass is unlikely to be penetrated. Lami-
nated glass has a mode of breakage classification of Type B.  
 

1.4.17.  Laminated glazing  

The configuration designed such that the glass remains held in place in the frame if bro-
ken. Note: for glass consisting of only FT panels, this will require a specially designed re-
tention system for the broken glass.  
 

1.4.18.  Toughened Glass (Fully Tempered) (FT)  

Glass that has been heat treated to enhance its strength and resistance to impact, and its 
breakage characteristic. Thermally toughened soda-lime glass is difficult to break, but if 
broken, it fragments into small, relatively harmless pieces. Toughened (tempered) glass 
has a mode of breakage classification of Type C.  
 

1.4.19.  Heat Strengthened Glass (HS)  

Glass that has been heat treated to enhance its strength and resistance to impact charac-
teristics. If heat strengthened glass is broken the resulting edges will be sharp. Heat 
strengthened glass has a mode of breakage classification of Type A.  

 

 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 36 of 13481.4.20.  Plastics Covered Annealed (or Other) Glass  

Annealed (or other) glass covered with specially formulated organic materials (e.g. adhe-
sive-backed polymeric filmed glass) intended to hold the glass together after breakage. If 
broken it will be difficult to penetrate provided that the covering is applied in accordance 
with the manufacturer’s recommendations. Plastics covered annealed (or other) glass has 
a mode of breakage classification of Type B.  
 

1.4.21.  Plastics covered glazing  

A configuration such that the glass remains held in place in the frame if broken. Note: for 
glass consisting of only FT panels, this will require a specially designed retention system 
for the broken glass.  
 

1.4.22.  Insulating glass  

Glass involving more than one pane where each layer is separated with a space of several 
mm. The space may contain air or other specialist inert gasses designed to limit the trans-
fer of heat.  
 
a. 

If an insulating glass unit is installed in a critical location where there is pedestrian 
access to both sides of the unit, then both panes of the unit must meet these require-
ments. However, in situations where pedestrian access is restricted to one side of the 
unit, then only the accessible side must to conform to the requirements. An example 
would be where there is low level glazing in the facade of a building in the storeys 
above the ground floor, but with no pedestrian access to the external faces of the in-
sulating glass units.  

 
b.  Care should be taken to ensure that an insulating glass unit with two different pane 

specifications is installed the correct way round.  

 
c.  Heat-treated glass should bear a small but legible mark, visible on the lower left cor-

ner of the glass when installed, which indicates its nature / performance.  

 

1.4.23.  Labeling/Manifestation  

Patterns, logos or similar markings on glass, intended to make it immediately apparent to 
users of the area that glass is present in an opening, provided to reduce the likelihood of 
an accidental impact.  
 

1.4.24.  Overhead glazing  

Glazing above head height that is either horizontal or inclined at an angle to the horizon-
tal up to 75° and where there is general access to the areas beneath the glazing.  
 

1.4.25.  Plastic glazing materials  

These are glazing materials made from polymers that may not necessarily have a safety or 
fire resistance capability but, due to their organic nature, are required to have known re-
action to fire performance characteristics.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 37 of 1348 

1.5. Roofing 

 

1.5.1.  Roof Assembly  
 

A system designed to provide weather protection and resistance to design loads. The sys-
tem consists of a roof covering and roof deck or a single component serving as both the 
roof covering and the roof deck. A roof assembly includes the roof deck, vapor retarder, 
substrate or thermal barrier, insulation, vapor retarder and roof covering.  

 
1.5.2.  Roof Covering  
 

The covering applied to the roof deck for weather resistance, fire classification or appear-
ance.  

 
1.5.3.  Roof Deck  
 
 
1.5.4.  Roof recover  
 

The flat or sloped surface not including its supporting members or vertical supports.  

The process of installing an additional roof covering over a prepared existing roof cover-
ing without removing the existing roof covering.  

 
1.5.5.  Roof repair  
 

Reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing roof for the purposes of its mainte-
nance. 

 
1.5.6.  Roof replacement  
 

The process of removing the existing roof covering, repairing any damaged substrate and 
installing a new roof covering.  

 
1.5.7.  Rooftop structure  
 
 

An enclosed structure on or above the roof of any part of a building.  
Roof structures shall be constructed of materials consistent with the required type of con-
struction of the building. Such structures shall not be  used for habitation or storage and 
should not be considered a story. Roof structures on buildings shall be not more than 
8535 mm in height above the roof of the building. Towers, spires, and other architectural 
embellishments shall not be limited in height where constructed entirely of noncombus-
tible materials. Towers and spires shall extend not more than 6100 mm above the height 
limit permitted where constructed of combustible materials. See Chapter 1. Table 1.9.63. 
for further requirements. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 38 of 1348 

1.6. MCM/ACP Cladding 
 

 
1.6.1.  Cladding  
 

Cladding, other than thermal barrier and Sandwich Panels is a non-structural covering 
installed over structural surfaces. It is usually in Metal Composite Materials (MCM) but it 
is also available in a variety of building materials and made to tolerate extreme weather 
conditions. 

 
1.6.2.   MCM (Metal Composite Material, including ACP, Aluminium Composite Pan-

 

els)  
A factory manufactured panel consisting of metal skins bonded to both faces of a 
“core” (See 1.6.3. for Core definition). All MCM’s shall be tested and approved at the max-
imum thickness intended for use and intended assemblies. However, MCM’s including 
ACP’s shall have a minimum exterior skin thickness of 0.019 in. (0.5 mm), a minimum inte-
rior skin thickness of 0.010 in (0.25 mm), and a maximum panel thickness of ¼ in. (6.3 
mm) where installed on exterior walls. 

 
1.6.3.   MCM and ACP Core  
 

Core used in factory manufactured MCM can be of plastic or mineral or any such material 
other than foam plastic insulation, having flame and smoke spread characteristics. 

 
1.6.4.  Thermal Barrier (Thermal Insulation)  
 

A material, product, or assembly that prevents or delays ignition of an unexposed surface 
by limiting the temperature rise and by acting as a flame exposure barrier. 

 
1.6.5.  Fire Barrier  
 

A continuous membrane or a membrane with discontinuities created by protected open-
ings with a specified fire protection rating, where such membrane is designed and con-
structed with a specified fire resistance rating to limit the spread of fire. Fire barriers are 
to be continuous from floor to underside of the floor above or fire rated ceiling and from 
the inside face of exterior to another exterior wall or other fire barrier with equal or 
greater fire rating. 

 
1.6.6.  Bearing Wall System 
 

A structural system with bearing walls providing support for all or major portions of the 
vertical loads. Shear walls or braced frames provide seismic force resistance  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 39 of 1348 

1.7. Occupancies and Types of Buildings 

1.7.1.  Assembly  
 

An occupancy used for a gathering of people for deliberation, worship, entertainment, 
eating, drinking, amusement, awaiting transportation, or similar uses. 

 
1.7.2.  Business  
 

An occupancy used for the transaction of business other than mercantile, usually used for 
office, professional or service-type transactions, including storage of records and ac-
counts. 

 
1.7.3.  Educational   
 
 
1.7.4.  Healthcare  
 

An occupancy used for educational purposes. 

An occupancy used to provide medical, psychiatric, surgical, therapeutic treatment  for 
people. 

 
1.7.5.  Residential 
 

An occupancy, other than Villa (See definitions 1.7.43, 1.7.44), that provides sleeping ac-
commodations with independent cooking and bathroom facilities where people live on a 
permanent basis. 

 
1.7.6.  Hotel  
 

A building or groups of buildings under the same management in which there are sleeping 
accommodations for lodging with or without meals for people on a transients basis. 

 
1.7.7.  Daycare  
 

An occupancy in which four or more clients receive care, maintenance, and supervision, 
by other than their relatives or legal guardians, for less than 24 hours per day. 

 
1.7.8.  Detention and Correctional  
 

An occupancy used to house one or more persons under varied degrees of restraint or 
security where such occupants are mostly incapable of self-preservation because of secu-
rity measures not under the occupants’ control. 

 

 

 

1.7.8.1.  Use condition I, Free Egress 
 

A condition under which free movement is allowed from sleeping areas and 
other spaces where access or occupancy is permitted to the exterior via means 
of egress. 

1.7.8.2.  Use condition II, Zoned Egress 
 

A condition under which free movement is allowed from sleeping areas and any 
other occupied smoke compartment to one or more other smoke compart-
ments 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 40 of 1348 

1.7. Occupancies and Types of Buildings 
 

1.7.8.3.  Use condition III, Zoned Impeded Egress 
 

A condition under which free movement is allowed within individual smoke 
compartments, such as within a residential unit comprised of individual sleep-
ing rooms and a group activity space, with egress impeded by remote-
controlled release of means of egress from such a smoke compartment to an-
other smoke compartment. 

 
1.7.8.4.  Use condition IV, Impeded Egress 
 

A condition under which free movement is restricted from an occupied space, 
and remote controlled release is provided to allow movement from all sleeping 
rooms, activity spaces, and other occupied areas within the smoke compart-
ment to another smoke compartment. 

 
1.7.8.5.  Use condition V, Contained 
 

A condition under which free movement is restricted from an occupied space, 
and staff-controlled manual release at each door is provided to allow move-
ment from all sleeping rooms, activity spaces, and other occupied areas within 
the smoke compartment to another smoke compartment. 

 

 
1.7.9.  Mercantile  
 

An occupancy used for the display and sale of merchandise. It involves stocks of goods, 
wares or merchandise. 

 

 

1.7.9.1.  Class A 
 

Mercantile occupancies having an aggregate gross area of more than 2800 M2 
or occupying more than three storeys (Midrise building) for sales purposes. 

 
1.7.9.2.  Class B 
 

Mercantile occupancies having an aggregate gross area of 280 M2 to not more 
than  2800 M2  and occupying not more than three storeys (Lowrise building) 
for sales purposes. 

1.7.9.2.  Class C 
 

Mercantile occupancies having an aggregate gross area of not more than       
280 M2  and occupying only ground floor for sales purposes. 

 
 
1.7.10.  Storage/ Warehouse   
 

An occupancy used primarily for the storage or sheltering of goods, merchandise, prod-
ucts, or vehicles. 

 
1.7.11.  Industrial/ Factory/ Workshop  
 

An occupancy in which products are manufactured or in which processing, assembling, 
mixing, packaging, finishing, decorating, or repair operations are conducted. 

 
 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 41 of 1348 

1.7. Occupancies and Types of Buildings 
 

1.7.12.  Robotic or Mechanical Storage 
 

A warehouse or storage structure that uses computer controlled machines to store and 
retrieve goods, in multi-level storage racks with no floors. 

1.7.13.  Covered Mall  
 

A roofed or covered common pedestrian area within a covered mall building that serves 
as access for multiple tenants and not to exceed three levels that are open to each other.  

 
1.7.14.  Open Mall  
 

An unroofed common pedestrian way serving a number of tenants not exceeding three 
levels. Circulation at levels above grade shall be permitted to include open exterior balco-
nies leading to exits discharging at grade. 

 
1.7.15.  Anchor Shop (Building)  
 

A retail shop/building having low or ordinary hazard contents and having direct access to 
a mall building, but having all required means of egress independent of the mall. 

 
1.7.16.  Parking   
 

A building, structure, or portion thereof used for the parking, storage, or both, of motor 
vehicles. 

 
1.7.17.  Open Parking 
 

A Parking occupancy where in each parking level, any part of the carpark is within 30 m of 
the permanent natural ventilation wall openings open to the atmosphere for an area of 
not less than 0.4m2 for each linear meter distributed over 40 percent of the building pe-
rimeter surface or uniformly over two opposing sides. And interior wall lines and column 
lines are at least 20 percent open, with openings distributed to provide ventilation. 

1.7.18.   Enclosed Parking 
 

A parking occupancy which doesn't qualify as open parking and is enclosed on all sides. 

1.7.19.   Robotic or Mechanical Parking 
 

A parking structure that uses computer controlled machines to store and retrieve vehi-
cles, without drivers, in multi-level storage racks with no floors. 

 
1.7.20.   Animal Housing 
 

An occupancy where animals, birds and creatures are fed, rested, exercised, Trained, sold, 
treated, exhibited, reproduced such as Veterinary Clinics, Zoos, Animal care centers, pet 
shops. 

 
1.7.21.   Fuel Dispensing Facilities/ Gas Stations/ Petrol Stations 
 

An occupancy where motor fuels are stored and dispensed from fixed equipment into the 
fuel tanks of motor vehicles or marine craft or into approved containers, including all 
equipment used in connection therewith.  

 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 42 of 1348 

1.7. Occupancies and Types of Buildings 
 

1.7.22.   Multiple Occupancy 
 
 
1.7.23.   Mixed Occupancy 
 
 
1.7.24.   Pedestrian Walkway/Bridge 
 

A multiple occupancy where the occupancies are intermingled.  

A building or structure in which two or more classes of occupancy exist.  

A cross walk or other identified path, usually elevated bridge like structure or below grade 

tunnel intended for pedestrian use in crossing a vehicular way, or connecting two build-

ings and primarily designed for pedestrian traffic. 

1.7.25.   Airport Terminal Building 
 

A structure used primarily for air passenger enplaning or deplaning, including ticket sales, 

flight information, baggage handling, and other necessary functions in connection with air 

transport operations. This term includes any extensions and satellite buildings used for 

passenger handling or aircraft flight service functions.  

1.7.26.   Satellite  
 

A structure that can be adjacent to but separated from the airport terminal building, ac-

cessible aboveground or through subway passages, and used to provide flight service op-

erations, such as passenger check-in, waiting rooms, food service, enplaning or deplaning, 

etc. 

1.7.27.   Aircraft Hanger  
 

A building or other structure inside any part of which aircraft are housed or stored and in 

which aircraft might undergo service, repairs, or alterations. 

1.7.28.   Airport Traffic Control Tower  
 

An enclosed structure or building at airports with elevated levels for support of equip-

ment and occupied for observation, control, operation, and signaling of aircraft in flight 

and on the ground. 

 
1.7.29.  Tent  
 

A temporary structure, the covering of which is made of pliable material that achieves its 
support by mechanical means such as beams, columns, poles, or arches, or by rope or 
cables, or both. Locally tents are occupied as Ramadan Tents, Exhibitions, Marriages, fu-
nerals, Party, entertainment, Dining or meetings. See section 7.1.42. for material require-
ments. 

 
1.7.30.  Membrane Structure 
 

A building or portion of a building incorporating an air-inflated, air-supported, tensioned- 
membrane structure; a membrane roof; or a membrane-covered rigid frame to protect 
habitable or usable space. See section 7.1.41. for material requirements. 

 
 
 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 43 of 1348 

1.7. Occupancies and Types of Buildings 
 
 

1.7.31.  Air-Inflated Structure 
 

A structure whose shape is maintained by air pressure in cells or tubes forming all or part 
of the enclosure of the usable area and in which the occupants are not within the pressur-
ized area used to support the structure. See section 7.1.43. for material requirements. 

 
1.7.32.  Air-Supported Structure  
 

A structure where shape is maintained by air pressure and in which occupants are within 
the elevated pressure area. See section 7.1.43. for material requirements. 

 
1.7.33.  Kiosks 
 

A structure, temporary or permanent in nature constructed of wood, textile, plastic, com-
posite panels etc.  occupied as retail outlet, food outlet, service outlet, generally located 
at malls, shopping centers, assembly areas and exhibition centers. See section 7.1.40. for 
material requirements. 

 
1.7.34.  Private Villa 
 

Single family dwelling unit, generally ground with first floor, built and solely owned by 
individual on the individual plot. 

 
1.7.35.  Commercial Villa 
 

One or Two family dwelling units built in a group by developer and sold, leased or rented 
to individual families. Mosques, community halls, recreation facilities may also be part of 
this development. 

 
1.7.36.   Multiple Occupancy 
 
 
1.7.37.   Mixed Occupancy 
 
 
1.7.38.   Separated Occupancy 
 

A building or structure in which two or more classes of occupancy exist.  

A multiple occupancy where the occupancies are intermingled.  

A multiple occupancy where the occupancies are separated by fire resistance–rated as-
semblies. 

 
1.7.39.  Low Rise Building  
 

The occupancies or Multiple and Mixed occupancies, facilities, buildings and structures 
having total height of the building (excluding roof parapets) at or up to 15 Meters from 
the lowest grade or lowest level of Fire Service  access into that occupancy is categorized 
as Lowrise Building.  

 
1.7.40.  Mid Rise Building  
 

The occupancies or Multiple and Mixed occupancies, facilities, buildings and structures 
having total height of the building (excluding roof parapets) is between 15 Meters to 23 
meters from the lowest grade or lowest level of Fire Service  access into that occupancy is 
categorized as Midrise Building.  

 
 
 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 44 of 1348 

1.7. Occupancies and Types of Buildings 

 
1.7.41.  High Rise Building  
 

The occupancies or Multiple and Mixed occupancies, facilities, buildings and structures 
having total height of the building (excluding roof parapets) is between 23 Meters to 90 
meters from the lowest grade or lowest level of Fire Service  access into that occupancy is 
categorized as Highrise Building.  

1.7.42.  Super High Rise Building  
 

The occupancies or Multiple and Mixed occupancies, facilities, buildings and structures 
having total height of the building (excluding roof parapets) is more than 90 meters from 
the lowest grade or lowest level of Fire Service  access into that occupancy is categorized 
as Superhighrise Building.  

 
1.7.43.  Underground Building or Structure 
 

A structure or portion of a structure in which the floor level is below the level of exit dis-
charge.  

 
1.7.44.  Low Depth Underground Building  
 

An underground structure or a building up to 7 m below or having up to two basements 
below the level of exit discharge.  

 
1.7.45.  High Depth Underground Building  
 

An underground structure or a building more than 7 m below or having more than two 
basements below the level of exit discharge.  

 
1.7.46.  Multiple Occupancies Protected as Mixed Occupancies 
 

A building, structure or facility where more than one classes of occupancies exist is noted 
as Multiple occupancy. Occupancies are often mixed and their exits are intermingled with 
one type of occupancy located and associated with other classes of occupancies,  facili-
ties, buildings and structures without a definite Fire Barrier or with intermingling exits 
such as Offices located in Showrooms, Shopping Centers, Souks, industrial facilities or hos-
pitals. Mixed occupancies are combinations of various Hazard Content and Hazard catego-
ries. Accordingly the code application in such occupancies is based on the most stringent 
requirements.  

1.7.47.  Separated Multiple Occupancies as Protected Occupancies 
 

A building, structure or facility which houses multiple occupancies similar to ‘Mixed Occu-
pancies’ but with definite Fire Barriers, distinctive separate Exit Access and Exits, 
‘separating’ the different classes of occupancies from each other.  

1.7.48.  Occupancy Hazard  
 

Hazard Content and Hazard evaluation for the occupancies differ based on the material 
involved and its burning characteristics.  Civil Defence has approached the occupancy haz-
ards based on the life safety, risk involved and fire protection system requirements and 
categorized the types of occupancies further into Group A, Group B and Group C occupan-
cies. 

 

 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 45 of 1348 

1.7. Occupancies and Types of Buildings 

 
 
1.7.49.  Category A (Group A)  
 

Category A is the original occupancy classification as per international building and Life 
Safety Codes, which is based on hazard evaluation, occupant loads, functionality etc. in 
addition, Civil Defence considers Group A occupancy as having High hazard in terms of  
Risk involved and high priority in terms of fire protection system requirements.  

 
1.7.50.  Category B (Group B)  
 

Category B represents the original classifications as per international building and Life 
Safety Codes with moderate or ordinary hazard content.  Most occupancies generally 
have moderate hazard or ordinary  hazard such as Paper, Records, Books, Computers, 
Carpet, Household Plastic, Home Appliances, Electronic & Electrical Office Equipment,  
Furniture, Wood, Bedding and upholstery.  

 
1.7.51.  Category C (Group C)  
 

Category C represents some additional occupancies as we know it locally along with the 
original classifications as per international building and Life Safety Codes. Group C occu-
pancies have the lowest hazard or light hazard content and thus lowest requirements in 
terms of fire protection system requirements.  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 46 of 1348 

2.  Construction Requirements 

 

2.1.  Intention 

2.1.1. 

The construction requirements for buildings and structures in this chapter do not 
address Environmental impact, Structural Load analysis and withstanding natural 
disasters. The Construction requirements in this chapter are to ensure Fire Safety 
in and around buildings and structures and are to achieve the following. 

 

2.1.1.1.  Buildings are designed and constructed to provide safety from structural fail-

ure during fire.  

 
2.1.1.2.  Buildings are designed and constructed to provide protection to occupants 

from fire. 

 
2.1.1.3.  Buildings are designed and constructed 
to contain fire in its origin compartment 
and stop from spreading to other areas.  
 

2.1.1.4.  Fire in one building and structure do not 
spread to neighboring buildings or prop-
erties.  

 

2.2.  General 

2.2.1. 

Each occupancy shall not exceed the area limi-
tations or be located at a height greater than 
that permitted for such occupancy and the 
type of construction being used.  

2.2.2.  Where minor accessory usages do not occupy 

Did You Know? 

Probably the earliest 

traces of building 

code is after Rome 

city burned in 64 AD.  

Emperor Nero came 

up with requirement of  

fireproof materials be 

used for external walls 

in rebuilding the Rome 

city. 

more than 25 percent of the area of any floor of a 
building, the principal use of the building shall determine the occupancy classifica-
tion. 

2.2.3. 

In high-rise occupancies, the most restrictive, applicable, high-rise building provi-
sions and fire protection system requirements shall apply to all portions of the 
building. 

2.2.4.  Where separated occupancies are provided, each part of the building comprising a 

distinct occupancy, as described in this chapter, shall be completely separated 
from other occupancies by fire-resistive assemblies, as specified in Table 1.1 be-
low. 

2.2.5. 

Requirements in this chapter are minimum guidelines. It is consultant’s responsi-
bility to refer to international standards such as NFPA 5000, NFPA 501, NFPA 502, 
NFPA 409, NFPA 294, NFPA 130, NFPA 88A, NFPA 30  and IBC, on which this chap-
ter is based on, for further clarifications and code complaint building constructions. 

 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 47 of 1348 

 

2.3.  Types of Occupancies (Occupancy Classifications) 

2.3.1. 

Table 1.1. defines the occupancies, based on which the construction requirements, 
height, area, Fire resistance of structural elements, separation between buildings 
are dictated. For sprinkler design purpose, occupancy classifications shall be in ac-
cordance with Chapter 9, Section 1.1.13. 

Table 1.1: Types of Occupancies based on their usage, Hazard and number of occupants (RISKS) 

OCCUPANCY 

GROUP A 

GROUP B 

GROUP C 

1.  Banquet halls 
2.  Night clubs 
3.  Discos  
4.  Restaurants  with 

more than 50 people 

5.  Pubs 
6.  Bars 
7.  Theaters  
8.  Concert Halls 
9.  Cinemas 
10. Indoor Stadiums 
11. Studios with audience 
12. Exhibition halls 
13. Casinos 

1. Amusement  Park 
2.  Grandstands 
3.  Outdoor Stadiums 
4.  Bleachers  
5.  Swimming Pools 
6.  Skating Rinks 
7.  Indoor Kid’s Play Areas 
8.  Bowling alleys 
9.  Pool/billiard parlors  
10.Waiting areas in trans-

portation terminals. 

11.Airport Terminal Build-

ings 

12.Food courts, seating 

areas 

1.  Electronic data pro-

cessing 

2.  Telephone exchanges 
3.  Radio and television 

stations 

4.  Laboratories 
5.  Testing and research 
6.  Airport traffic control 

1.  Offices 
2.  Modular Site Offices 
3.  Banks 
4.  Government offices 
5.  Post offices 
6.  Money Exchange cen-

ters 

7.  Sales and Marketing 

towers  

Offices 

1.  Art galleries 
2.  Community halls  
3.  Mosques 
4.  Churches 
5.  Temples 
6.  Courtrooms  
7.  Funeral parlors  
8.  Gymnasiums  
9.  Fitness Centers 
10. Seminar halls  
11. Libraries 
12. Museums 
13. Open air Theaters 
14. Amphitheaters  
15. Parks 
16. Beaches 

1.  Barber Shops 
2.  Beauty Shops 
3.  Massage Centers 
4.  Typing Centers 
5.  Translation centers 
6.  Print Shops 
7.  Photo Studios 
 

1.  Assembly 
 
An occupancy used 
for a gathering of 
people for delibera-
tion, worship, enter-
tainment, eating, 
drinking, amuse-
ment, awaiting 
transportation, or 
similar uses. 

2. Business 
 
An occupancy used 
for the transaction 
of business other 
than mercantile, 
usually used for 
office, professional 
or service-type 
transactions, includ-
ing storage of rec-
ords and accounts. 
 

8.  Professional/ Consul-

tancy services  such as 
architects, attorneys, 
dentists, physicians, 
engineers, etc.  

1.  Schools for up to 12th 

grade students 

 
 

1. Colleges 
2. Universities 
3. Training centers for 

adults 

1.  Ambulatory Health 

care center 

 

3. Educational 
 
An occupancy used 
for educational pur-
poses. 

1. Nurseries 
2. Kindergarten 
3. Preschool center 
4. Talent Grooming cen-

ters for kids  

4. Healthcare 
 
An occupancy used 
to provide medical, 
psychiatric, surgical, 
therapeutic treat-
ment  for people. 

1.  Hospitals.  
2.  Limited Care Facilities 
3.  Nursing Homes 
4.  Mental Asylums 

1. Clinics 
 
 
 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 48 of 13482.3.  Types of Occupancies 

Table 1.1: Types of Occupancies based on their usage, Hazard and number of occupants (RISKS) 

OCCUPANCY 

GROUP A 

GROUP B 

GROUP C 

1.  Residential buildings 
2.  Residential Apartments 
3.  Assisted Living Homes  
 

1.  Staff Accommodation  
2.  Hostels  
3.  Monasteries 
4.  School Boarding House 
 

1. Labor Accommo-

dation 

1. Private Villa without 

basement 

  

1. Commercial Villa 
 
 

 

 

1.  Private Villa with base-
ment and basemen car 
park. 

2.  Private Villa with ma-

rine front. 

3.  Private Villa on island. 

1.  Commercial Villa with 

basement and base-
ment car park. 

2.  Commercial Villa with 

marine front. 

3.  Commercial Villa on 

island. 

1.  Adult Prisons 
2.  Adult Detention centers 
3.  Adult Jails 
4.  Adult Correctional cen-

ters 

5.  Adult Pre-release cen-

ters 

1. Juvenile Prisons 
2. Juvenile Detention cen-

ters 

1.  Medical Quaran-

tines 

2.  Airport Quaran-

3. Juvenile Correctional 

tines 

centers 

 

 
 

5.  Residential 
 
An occupancy, other 
than Villa, that pro-
vides sleeping accom-
modations with inde-
pendent cooking and 
bathroom facilities 
where people live on a 
permanent basis. 
 

6. Private Villa 
 
Single family dwelling 
unit, generally ground 
with first floor, built 
and solely owned by 
individual on the indi-
vidual plot. 

7. Commercial Villa 
 
One or Two family 
dwelling units, general-
ly ground with first 
floor,  built in a group 
by developer and sold, 
leased or rented to in-
dividual families. 
Mosques, community 
halls, recreation facili-
ties may also be part of 
this development. 

8. Detention and  
    Correctional 
 
An occupancy used to 
house one or more per-
sons under varied de-
grees of restraint or 
security where such 
occupants are mostly 
incapable of self-
preservation because 
of security measures 
not under the occu-
pants’ control. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 49 of 13482.3.  Types of Occupancies 

Table 1.1: Types of Occupancies based on their usage, Hazard and number of occupants (RISKS) 

OCCUPANCY 

GROUP A 

GROUP B 

GROUP C 

1.  Hotels 
2.  Hotel Apartments 
3.  Time share properties 
 

1. Dormitory 
2.  Motels 
3.  Lodging 
  

1.  Resorts 

1. Child Day care centers  
2. Od age care centers  

1. Adult Day care centers 
 
 

 

1.  Hardware Stores 
2.  Paint Stores 
3.  Chemical Stores 
4.  Furniture Stores 
5.  Motor Vehicle Show-

rooms 

6.  Restaurants with less 

than 50 people 

1.    Department Stores 
2.    Supermarkets 
3.    Hypermarkets 
4.    Shopping Centers 
5.    Anchor stores 
6.    Showrooms 
7.    Retail stores  
8.    Whole sale stores 
9.  Boutiques 
10.  Drugstores 
11.  Gift Shops 

1.  Kiosks 
2.  Food Trucks 
3.  Mercantile 

Trucks 

      
 
 
 

9. Hotel 
 
A building or groups of 
buildings under the 
same management in 
which there are sleep-
ing accommodations 
for lodging with or 
without meals for peo-
ple on a transients ba-
sis. 
 

10. Day care 
 
An occupancy in which 
four or more clients 
receive care, mainte-
nance, and supervision, 
by other than their rel-
atives or legal guardi-
ans, for less than 24 
hours per day. 
 

11.  Mercantile 
 
An occupancy used for 
the display and sale of 
merchandise. It in-
volves stocks of goods, 
wares or merchandise. 
 
Group of mercantile 
occupancies under a 
single roof or not sepa-
rated and having a 
ground floor built up 
area of more than 3600 
m2 , irrespective of the 
number of storeys, 
shall be considered as 
Malls. 
 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 50 of 1348 

 

Table 1.1: Types of Occupancies based on their usage, Hazard and number of occupants (RISKS) 

OCCUPANCY 

GROUP A 

GROUP B 

GROUP C 

12. Storage / Ware-

house 

 
An occupancy used 
primarily for the 
storage or sheltering 
of goods, merchan-
dise, products, or 
vehicles. 

GROUP A-1 
1.  Explosives 
2.  Detonators 
3.  Pyrophoric mate-

rial 

4.  Unstable 

(Reactive) materi-
al 

5.  Organic Peroxide 
6.  Oxidizer 
7.  Fire Works 
 
GROUP A-2 
1.  Aerosols Level 

1,2,3 

2.  Combustible Liq-
uid Class I, II, III 

3.  Combustible Fiber 
4.  Combustible Dust 
5.  Pyrotechnic Mate-

rial 

6.  Cryogenics, Flam-
mable, Oxidizing 
7.  Flammable Gas 
8.  Flammable Liquid, 

IA, IB, IC 

9.  Flammable Solid 
10.  Oxidizing Gas 
11.  Water Reactive 

Material 
12.  Perfumes 
13.  Baled Cotton 
14.  Corrosive Material 
15.  Toxic Material 
16.  Plastic products 
17.  Tires 
 
 
 

1.  Aircraft hangar  
2.  Bags: cloth/burlap/

paper  

3.  Bamboos and rattan 
4.  Baskets  
5.  Belting: canvas/leather  
6.  Books and paper in 

rolls or packs  

7.  Boots and shoes 
8.  Buttons 
9.  Cardboard , its boxes  
10.  Clothing, woolen wear-

ing apparel 

11.  Cordage  
12.  Dry boat storage 

(indoor)  

13.  Furniture  
14.  Furs  
15.  Glues, mucilage, pastes  
16.  Grains  
17.  Horns and combs, oth-

er than celluloid 

18.  Leather  
19.  Linoleum  
20.  Lumber  
21.  Motor vehicle repair 

garages  

22.  Photo engravings 
23.  Resilient flooring  
24.  Silks  
25.  Soaps  
26.  Sugar  
27.  Tobacco, cigars, ciga-

rettes and snuff  
28.  Upholstery and 

mattresses  

29.  Wax candles  
 

1.   Frozen Food 
2.  Asbestos  
3.  Glass or ceramic  
4.  Cement in bags  
5.  Chalk and crayons 
6.  Dairy products in 

nonwaxed coated pa-
per containers  

7.  Dry cell batteries  
8.  Electrical coils  
9.  Electrical motors  
10. Empty cans  
11. Foods in noncombus-

tible containers  

12. Fresh fruits and vege-

tables in nonplastic 
trays or containers 

13. Glass bottles, empty or 
filled with noncombus-
tible liquids  

14. Gypsum board 
15. Inert pigments  
16. Ivory  
17. Meats  
18. Metal cabinets  
19. Metal desks with plas-
tic tops and trim Metal 
parts  

20. Metals  
21. Mirrors  
22. Oil-filled and other 

types of distribution 
transformers  

23. Parking garages, open 

or enclosed  

24. Porcelain and pottery 
25. Stoves 
26. Talc and soapstones 
27. Washers and dryers 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 51 of 1348 

Table 1.1: Types of Occupancies based on their usage, Hazard and number of occupants (RISKS) 

OCCUPANCY 

GROUP A 

GROUP B 

GROUP C 

1.    Beverages (non-

alcoholic)  

2.    Brick and masonry 
3.  Ceramic Foundries 
4.  Glass products 
5.  Gypsum  
6. 
7.  Metal products 
(fabrication and 
assembly)  

Ice  

8.  Telecommunica-
tions signal pro-
cessing  

9.  Telephone ex-

changes 

10. GSM Switching Sta-

tions 

GROUP A-1 
Manufacturing, Pro-
cessing, Refilling, Pack-
aging, Distributing  of- 
1.  Explosives 
2.  Detonators 
3.  Pyrophoric material 
4.  Unstable (Reactive) 

material 

5.  Organic Peroxide 
6.  Oxidizer 
7.  Fire Works 
 
GROUP A-2 
Manufacturing, Pro-
cessing, Using, Refilling, 
Packaging, Distributing  
of- 
1.  Aerosols Level 1,2,3 
2.  Combustible Liquid 

Class I, II, III 

3.  Combustible Fiber 
4.  Combustible Dust 
5.  Pyrotechnic Material 
6.  Cryogenics, Flamma-

ble, Oxidizing 

7.  Flammable Gas 
8.  Flammable Liquid, 

IA, IB, IC 

9.  Flammable Solid 
10.  Oxidizing Gas 
11.  Water Reactive Ma-

terial 

12.  Perfumes 
13.  Baled Cotton 
14.  Corrosive Material 
15.  Toxic Material 
16.  Plastic products 
17.  Tires 
18.  Aircraft 
19.  Metal Extruding  
20.  Chemical Plants 
21.  Incinerates 
22.  Plywood 
23.  Tobacco 
24.  Paint and Varnish 
25.  Asphalt 
26.  Rubber works 
 

1.  Appliances  
2.  Athletic equipment 
3.  Automobiles   
4.  Bakeries  
5.  Beverages (alcoholic) 
6.  Bicycles  
7.  Boat building  
8.  Brooms or brushes 
9.  Business machines 
10.  Cameras and photo 

equipment  
11.  Cold Storage 
12.  Canvas or similar fabric 
13.  Carpets and rugs 
14.  Clothing  
15.  Construction  
16.  Disinfectants  
17.  Dry-cleaning /dyeing 
18.  Electric light plants and 

power houses 

19.  Substations   
20.  Electronics  
21.  Engines  
22.  Food processing  
23.  Furniture  
24.  Hemp products  
25.  Jute products  
26.  Laundries  
27.  Leather products   
28.  Machinery  
29.  Millwork   
30.  Media filming  
31.  Motor repair garages  
32.  Musical instruments 
33.  Optical goods  
34.  Paper mills or products 
35.  Photographic film  
36.  Printing or publishing 
37.  Recreational vehicles 
38.  Refuse incineration 
39.  Shoes  
40.  Soaps and detergents 
41.  Tobacco  
42.  Trailers  
43.  Upholstering  
44.  Wood (distillation) 
45.  Woodworking 

13.1. Industrial /  
         Factories /   
         Workshops 
 
An occupancy in 
which products are 
manufactured or in 
which processing, 
assembling, mixing, 
packaging, finishing, 
decorating, or repair 
operations are con-
ducted. 
 
 
13.2. Special purpose 

industries and 
factories 

 
An industrial occu-
pancy in which ordi-
nary and low hazard 
industrial operations 
are conducted in 
buildings designed 
for, and suitable only 
for, particular types 
of operations, char-
acterized by a rela-
tively low density of 
employee popula-
tion, with much of 
the area occupied by 
machinery or equip-
ment. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 52 of 1348 

 

OCCUPANCY 

Table 1.1: Types of Occupancies based on their usage, Hazard and number of occupants (RISKS) 

GROUP A 

GROUP B 

GROUP C 

1.  Covered 

Mall 

 

 

1.  Open Mall  
 
 
 

1.  Enclosed 
       Parking 

1.  Mechanical 

1. Open 

Parking 
2.  Robotic 
Parking 

Parking 
2. Covered 
Parking 

14. Malls 
 
14.1. Covered Mall: 
 
A roofed or covered common pedestrian area within a 
covered mall building that serves as access for multiple 
tenants and not to exceed three levels that are open to 
each other.  
 
 
14.2.  Open Mall: 
 
An unroofed common pedestrian way serving a number 
of tenants not exceeding three levels. Circulation at lev-
els above grade shall be permitted to include open exte-
rior balconies leading to exits discharging at grade. 

15. Parking 
 
A building, structure, or portion thereof used for the 
parking, storage, or both, of motor vehicles. 
 
15.1. Open Parking: 
 
A Parking occupancy where in each parking level, any 
part of the carpark is within 30 m of the permanent nat-
ural ventilation wall openings open to the atmosphere 
for an area of not less than 0.4 m2
 for each linear meter 
distributed over 40 percent of the building perimeter 
surface or uniformly over two opposing sides. And interi-
or wall lines and column lines are at least 20 percent 
open, with openings distributed to provide ventilation. 
 
15.2. Enclosed Parking: 
 
A parking occupancy which doesn't qualify as open park-
ing and is enclosed on all sides. 
 
15.3. Robotic or Mechanical Parking: 
 
A parking structure that uses computer controlled ma-
chines to store and retrieve vehicles, without drivers, in 
multi-level storage racks with no floors. 
 
15.4. Covered Parking: 
 
An open parking space with cover or sunshade. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 53 of 1348 

 

OCCUPANCY 

GROUP A 

GROUP B 

GROUP C 

Table 1.1: Types of Buildings based on the Height 

1.  Group A storage 

1.  Group B Storage 

1.  Group C Storage 

materials. 

materials 

Materials. 

 

 

 

1.  Animal Market 
2.  Pet Shops 
3.  Bird Market 
4.  Veterinary Clinic 
 

1.  Stable 
2.  Animal sheds 
3.  Livestock Shelter 
4.  Slaughter Houses 
 

1.  Zoo 
 

1.  Petrol Stations 
2.  Gas Stations 
 
With Mini Marts,   
Restaurants, Dining,        
food courts, Retail, 
Business and Service/
Repair stations. 
 

1.  Petrol Stations 
2.  Gas Stations 
 
Restaurants/Bakeries, 
Housed by Mini Marts, 
Service /Repair        
Stations 
 
3.   Fleet Vehicle Fuel 

1.  Petrol Stations 
2.  Gas Stations 
 
With Mini Mart alone 
 
3.   Electric Charging 

Units 

Dispensing  

4.   Marine Motor Fuel   

Dispensing 

 

16. Robotic Storage 
 
An occupancy  or A warehouse 
or storage structure that uses 
computer controlled machines 
to store and retrieve goods, in 
multi-level storage racks with 
no floors. 

17. Animal Housing 
 
An occupancy where animals, 
birds and creatures are fed, 
rested, exercised, Trained, 
sold, treated, exhibited, repro-
duced such as Veterinary Clin-
ics, Zoos, Animal care centers, 
pet shops. 
 

18. Motor Fuel Dispensing  
      Facilities (Gas/Petrol  
      Stations) 
 
An occupancy where motor 
fuels are stored and dispensed 
from fixed equipment into the 
fuel tanks of motor vehicles or 
marine craft or into approved 
containers, including all equip-
ment used in connection 
therewith.  
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 54 of 1348 

 

2.4.  Mixed Occupancies 

2.4.1.  Mixed Occupancy is a multiple occupancy where two or more various occupancies 

are intermingled without fire resistive assembly separation between them. 

 
2.4.2. 

 
2.4.3. 

Each part of such mixed occupancy shall be classified according to the specific us-
age as defined by Table 1.1. Types of Occupancies. 

In Multiple Occupancies, where exit access from an occupancy traverses another 
occupancy, the multiple occupancy shall be treated (or protected) as a mixed occu-
pancy. 

 
2.4.4.  Mixed Occupancies shall be provided with most restrictive Fire Safety require-

ments of the occupancy involved, including the egress and protection provisions. 

 

2.5.  Separated Occupancies 

Separated Occupancy is a multiple occupancy where two or more various occupan-
cies shall be compartmented by fire resistive assembly separation between them 
as per Table 1.2. 

Such Occupancy separations shall be vertical, horizontal, or both or, when neces-
sary, of such other form as required to provide complete separation between oc-
cupancy divisions in the building. 

Each part of such separated occupancy shall be classified according to the specific 
usage as defined by Table 1.1. Types of Occupancies. 

2.5.1. 

 
2.5.2. 

 
2.5.3. 

  

Table 1.2: Fire rating of fire resistant assemblies to achieve Separation in multiple occupancies 

MULTIPLE OCCUPANCIES 

WITH  
SPRINKLERS 

WITHOUT  
SPRINKLERS 

1. BETWEEN—Assembly, Residential Apartments, Business, Educa-

1 Hour 

2 Hour 

tional, Day Care,  Health care Group B or Group C, 
Villas, Hotel, Industrial Group C, Storage Group C, 
Covered Mall 

2. BETWEEN—Healthcare Group A and any other occupancies 

2 Hour 

3. BETWEEN—Detention and Correction and any other occupancies  2 Hour 

4. BETWEEN—Mercantile and any other occupancies 

1 Hour  

5. BETWEEN— Commercial villa and commercial villa (Townhouses)  2 Hour 

6. BETWEEN—Industrial Group  B or Industrial Group C and any  

1 Hour 

other occupancies 

7. BETWEEN—Industrial Group  A and any other occupancies 

2 Hour  

8. BETWEEN—Storage Group  B or Storage Group C and                   

1 Hour  

any other occupancies 

9. BETWEEN—Storage and Storage occupancies 

10. BETWEEN—Industrial and Industrial occupancies 

1 Hour  

1 Hour  

2 Hour 

2 Hour 

2 Hour 

2 Hour 

2 Hour 

3 Hour  

2 Hour  

1 Hour  

1 Hour  

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 55 of 13482.6.  Construction Types 

2.6.1.  Designation of Fire Resistance Rating. 
 
 

The system of designating types of construction includes a specific breakdown of 
the types of construction through the use of Arabic numbers. These Arabic num-
bers follow the roman numeral notation where identifying a type of construction 
*e.g., Type I(442), Type II(111), Type III(200)+ and indicate the fire resistance rating 
requirements for certain structural elements as follows: 

 

 
2.6.2. 

 
2.6.3. 
 
 

 
2.6.4. 
 
 
 

 

 

a.  First Arabic number —   
b.    Second Arabic number — columns, beams, girders, trusses and arches, sup-

  Exterior bearing walls 

porting bearing walls, columns, or loads from more 
than one floor 

c.  Third Arabic number —      floor construction 

Buildings and structures shall be classified according to their type of construction, 
which shall be based upon one of five basic types of construction designated as 
Type I, Type II, Type III, Type IV, and Type V. 

Type I and Type II Construction.  

Type I (442 or 332) and Type II (222, 111, or 000) construction shall be those types 
in which the fire walls, structural elements, walls, arches, floors, and roofs are of 
approved noncombustible or limited combustible materials. 
 
Type III Construction.  

The Type III construction shall be of following types. 

a.   Approved fire retardant treated wood framing is allowed where exterior wall 
are of 2 hour fire rated having horizontal separation of not less than 1525 mm 
with outer and inner faces of walls of limited-combustible or noncombustible 
materials. 
 

  
b.  Heavy Timber wood columns and arches are accepted when exterior walls are 

required to have 1 hour or less fire resistance. 

c.  When exterior non-load bearing walls are tested to Large scale tests, such as 

NFPA 285, it shall be permitted as Type III construction. 

Points to Ponder 

Civil Defence has not considered Type III, Type IV and Type V Construction types for buildings in 
UAE Fire and Life Safety Code of Practice except for Villas, Kiosks, Washrooms and cafeterias hav-
ing area less than 37 m2. If any construction falls under these categories, a large scale test comply-
ing to ASTM E-119, NFPA 285, BS 8414 , ISO 13785 or equivalent Civil Defence approved standards 
shall be done for such proposals to be accepted by Civil Defence. However, exemption of sprin-
klers is considered in lieu of allowing Type II (000) Constructions. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 56 of 1348 

 

2.6.5. 
 
 

 
 

 

Type IV Construction.  

Type IV (2HH) construction shall be that type in which fire walls, exterior walls, and 
interior bearing walls and structural elements that are portions of such walls are of 
approved noncombustible or limited combustible materials.  

Other interior structural elements, arches, floors, and roofs shall be of solid or lam-
inated wood or cross laminated timber without concealed spaces and shall comply 
 with the following dimensions. 

a.   Wood columns supporting floor loads shall be not less than 205 mm in any di-
mension. And Wood columns supporting only roof loads shall be not less than 
150 mm in width and not less than 205 mm in depth. 

 
 b.  Wood beams and girders supporting floor loads shall be not less than 150 mm 
in width and not less than 255 mm in depth. And Wood beams and girders and 
other roof framing supporting roof loads only shall be not less than 100 mm in 
width and not less than 150 mm in depth. 

 
c.   Framed or glued laminated arches that spring from the finished ground level or 
the floor line, and timber trusses that support floor loads, shall be not less than 
205 mm in width or depth. 

 
d.  Framed or glued laminated arches for roof construction that spring from the 

finished ground level or the floor line and do not support floor loads shall have 
members not less than 150 mm in width and not less than 205 mm in depth 
for the lower half of the member height, and not less than 150 mm in depth 
for the upper half of the member height.  

 
e.  Framed or glued laminated arches for roof construction that spring from the 
top of walls or wall abutments, and timber trusses that do not support floor 
loads, shall have members not less than 100 mm in width and not less than 
150 mm in depth. 

2.6.6. 
  

Type V (111 or 000) Construction. 

 

 Type V (111 or 000) construction shall be that type in which structural elements, 

walls, arches, floors, and roofs are entirely or partially of wood or other approved 

material. 

2.7.  Exterior Walls 

2.7.1. 

 
2.7.2. 

Exterior walls shall have fire resistance rating in accordance with Table 1.3. and 
1.4, whichever is greater. 

Exterior walls required to be fire rated by Table 1.3. because of horizontal separa-
tion shall be continuous from the foundation to not less than 760 mm above the 
roof. 

 
2.7.3.  Horizontal separation distance between adjacent buildings to dictate the required 

Fire resistance of exterior walls shall be measured at a 90-degree angle to the ex-
terior wall. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 57 of 1348 

 

2.7.4. 

The imaginary line shall be placed at a distance from the facing exterior wall of the 
adjacent building that is equal to the horizontal separation applicable for that wall 
based on its fire resistance rating and protection of openings. 

 

2.7.5.  Where the exterior wall has regular vertical shape, the following criteria shall be 

met: 

 

 

a.  The horizontal separation shall be determined by measuring from a vertical 
plane that is located so that no portion of the exterior wall is between such 
vertical plane and the line to which the horizontal separation is measured. 

b.  The area of openings shall be determined 
from the projection of the openings in the 
exterior wall onto the vertical plane. See 
Figure 1.2. 

 

2.7.6.  Where two or more buildings are lo-

cated on the same plot, the horizontal 
separation shall be measured from the 
exterior wall to an imaginary line or 
notional boundary drawn between the 
exterior walls of the adjacent build-
ings. See Figure 1.1 for illustrations. 

Figure 1.1: Measurement of Horizontal Separation 

 
 
 

2.7.7.  Where the exterior wall is an irregular vertical shape, the following criteria shall be 

met: 

 

a.  The horizontal separation shall be deter-

mined by measuring from a vertical plane 
that is located so that no portion of the 
exterior wall is between such vertical 
plane and the line to which the horizontal 
separation is measured. 

 
b.  The area of openings shall be determined 
from the projection (P) of the openings in 
the exterior wall onto the vertical plane. 
See Figure 1.2. 

 

Figure 1.2: Measurements of Horizontal Separation and projection of openings of irregular buildings 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 58 of 1348 

 

Table 1.3: Fire rating requirements of exterior walls based on Horizontal separations (HS) 

OCCUPANCY 

0m – 1.5m 

>1.5 m - 3m 

> 3m — 9 m 

HS 

HS 

HS 

> 9 m 

HS 

OTHER  
OPENING 
PROTECTIVE 
MEASURES 

1.  Assembly, Business, Edu-

1 Hour 

1 Hour 

cational, Day Care,  Health 
care, Hotel, Residential, 
Detention and Correction-
al. 

2.  Industrial Group C,  
     Storage Group C. 

1 Hour 

1 Hour 

3.  Mercantile 

2 Hour 

1 Hour 

Not  
Required 

Not  
Required 

AS PER TABLE 1.5. 

Not  
Required 

Not  
Required 

Not  
Required 

Not  
Required 

Not  
Required 

Not  
Required 

Not  
Required 

AS PER TABLE 1.5. 

AS PER TABLE 1.5. 

AS PER TABLE 1.6. 

AS PER TABLE 1.6. 

4.  Industrial Group B,  
     Storage Group B. 

5.  Industrial Group A,  
     Storage Group A. 

 

2 Hour  

1 Hour 

3 Hour 

2 Hour 

1 Hour 

2.8.  Openings in Exterior Wall 

2.8.2. 

2.8.1.  Where an exterior wall is required to have a fire resistance rating as determined by 
Table 1.3, the area of openings in exterior walls shall not exceed that permitted by 
Table1.4. or Table 1.5. 
 
The area of unprotected openings in an exterior wall shall be the aggregate of un-
protected openings expressed as a percentage of the area of the exterior wall. 
 
The area of an exterior wall shall be calculated as the length, edge to edge, of the 
exterior wall multiplied by the measurement from the finished ground level to the 
uppermost ceiling. 

2.8.3. 

 
2.8.4. 

 

 

The area of unprotected openings permitted by Table 1.4. and Table 1.5. shall be 
permitted to be doubled under either of the following conditions. 

a.  Where the building is protected throughout with an approved, electrically su-

pervised automatic sprinkler system.  

b.  Where the openings are protected with a fire window, fire door, fire shutters 

assembly or other listed opening protective shall have the required fire protec-
tion rating in accordance with Table 1.10. 

 

 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 59 of 13482.8.5. 

Table 1.4. shall be applicable to all occupancies except  Mercantile, Industrial 
Group A, Industrial Group B, Storage Group A, Storage Group B, Private Villas. 

Table 1.4: Maximum percentage area (%) of exterior wall per storey openings allowed based on Separation distance 

SEPARATION  
DISATNCE 

% ALLOWED FOR BUILDINGS 
NON-SPRINKLERED  AND 
NOT PROTECTED AS PER 
2.8.4.b. 

% ALLOWED FOR  
SPRINKLERED BUILDINGS 
AS PER CHAPTER 9 AND NOT 
PROTECTED AS PER 2.8.4.b.  

% ALLOWED FOR  
PROTECTED        
OPENINGS 
AS PER 2.8.4.b. 

NO OPENINGS ALLOWED 

NO OPENINGS ALLOWED 

NO OPENINGS AL-
LOWED 

NO OPENINGS ALLOWED 

15 % 

0 m –  
Less than 1 m 

1 m –  
Less than 1.5 m 

1.5 m –  
Less than 3 m 

10 % 

3 m –  
Less than 4.5 m 

15 % 

4.5 m –  
Less than 6 m 

25 % 

6 m –  
Less than 7.5 m 

45 % 

7.5 m –  
Less than  9 m 

70 % 

25 % 

UNLIMITED ALLOWED 

UNLIMITED ALLOWED 

15 % 

25 % 

45 % 

75 % 

UNLIMITED ALLOWED 

UNLIMITED ALLOWED 

UNLIMITED ALLOWED 

UNLIMITED ALLOWED 

9 m or More 

UNLIMITED ALLOWED 

UNLIMITED ALLOWED 

UNLIMITED ALLOWED 

 
2.8.6. 

Table 1.5. shall be applicable to Mercantile,  Industrial Group A, Industrial Group B, 
Storage Group A, Storage Group B.  

Table 1.5: Maximum percentage area (%) of exterior wall per storey openings allowed Group A, B occupancies 

SEPARATION  
DISATNCE 

% ALLOWED FOR BUILDINGS 
NON-SPRINKLERED  AND 
NOT PROTECTED AS PER 
2.8.4.b. 

% ALLOWED FOR  
SPRINKLERED BUILDINGS 
AS PER CHAPTER 9 AND NOT 
PROTECTED AS PER 2.8.4.b.  

% ALLOWED FOR  
PROTECTED  
OPENINGS 
AS PER 2.8.4.b. 

0 m –  
Less than 1 m 

1 m –  
Less than 1.5 m 

NO OPENINGS ALLOWED 

NO OPENINGS ALLOWED 

NO OPENINGS ALLOWED 

NO OPENINGS ALLOWED 

NO OPENINGS AL-
LOWED 

NO OPENINGS AL-
LOWED 

1.5 m –  
Less than 3 m 

4% 

3 m –  
Less than 4.5 m 

4% 

4.5 m –  
Less than 6 m 

4% 

6 m –  
Less than 7.5 m 

5% 

7.5 m –  
Less than  9 m 

5% 

8% 

8% 

8% 

10% 

10% 

8% 

8% 

8% 

10% 

10% 

9 m or More 

UNLIMITED ALLOWED 

UNLIMITED ALLOWED 

UNLIMITED ALLOWED 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 60 of 13482.8.7. 

The fire-resistance rating of exterior walls required by Table 1.3  for  a fire separa-
tion distance of greater than 3 m shall be rated for exposure to fire from the in-
side. And for separation distance of less than or equal to 3 m shall be rated for ex-
posure to fire from both inside and outside. 

 
2.8.8.  Opening protectives as required by 2.8.4.b. are not mandated where the building 

is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with  
chapter 9 and the exterior openings are protected by a water curtain using auto-
matic sprinklers approved for that use. 

 

 

2.8.9.  Where both unprotected and protected 

openings are located in the exterior wall in 
any storey of a building, the total area of 
openings shall be determined in accordance 
with this formula. 

 

 
 
 

 
2.8.10.  Except for Open parking OR buildings which are less than 15 m in height, openings 
in exterior walls in adjacent storeys shall be separated vertically to protect against 
fire spread on the exterior of the buildings where the openings are within 1524 
mm radius of each other horizontally and the opening in the lower storey is not a 
protected opening with a fire protection rating of not less than 3/4 hour. Such 
openings shall be separated vertically at least 915 mm by spandrel girders, exterior 
walls or other similar assemblies that have a fire-resistance rating of at least 1 hour 
or by flame barriers that extend horizontally at least 760 mm beyond the exterior 
wall. Flame barriers shall also have a fire-resistance rating of at least 1 hour.  

 
 
 

Did You Know? 

Earliest Fire tests to evaluate fire resistance of structures 

was during 1886 in Germany and 1890 in New York.  The 

American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) adopt-

ed and improvised these test standards during 1907.  

The NFPA adopted a much advanced version of the test 

method in 1918. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 61 of 1348 

2.9.  Fire Resistance rating for Construction Types 

2.9.1.  Fire resistance rating of structural elements for Type I and Type II construction types 

shall comply with Table 1.6. 

 
2.9.2.  Where conflicts arise between fire resistance rating requirements of Table 1.6. and 

other fire resistance rating requirements in this chapter,  Table 1.6. shall be super-
seded. (For example, exterior non-load bearing walls and interior non-load bearing 
corridor walls etc.) 

Table 1.6.: Fire resistance rating for construction types (Type I to Type II) in Hours 

STRUCTURAL ELEMENTS 

TYPE I 
(442) 

TYPE I 
(332) 

TYPE II 
(222) 

TYPE II 
(111) 

TYPE II 
(000) 

1. EXTERIOR BEARING WALLS (NOT LESS THAN TABLE 1.3) 

 

Supporting more than 1 floor or columns or other bearing walls  4 

Supporting 1 floor only 

Supporting roof only 

2. INTERIOR BEARING WALLS 

4 

4 

 

Supporting more than 1 floor or columns or other bearing walls  4 

Supporting 1 floor only 

Supporting roof only 

3. COLUMNS 

3 

3 

 

Supporting more than 1 floor or columns or other bearing walls  4 

Supporting 1 floor only 

Supporting roof only 

4. BEAMS, GIRDERS, TRUSSES AND ARCHES 

3 

3 

 

Supporting more than 1 floor or columns or other bearing walls  4 

Supporting 1 floor only 

Supporting roof only 

5. FLOOR-CEILING ASSEMBLIES 

6. ROOF-CEILING ASSEMBLIES 

7. INTERIOR NON-BEARING WALLS 

8. EXTERIOR NON-BEARING WALLS (NOT LESS THAN TABLE 
1.3) 

 

2 

2 

2 

2 

0 

0 

 

3 

3 

3 

 

3 

2 

2 

 

3 

2 

2 

 

3 

2 

2 

2 

1.5 

0 

0 

 

2 

2 

1 

 

2 

2 

1 

 

2 

2 

1 

 

2 

2 

1 

2 

1 

0 

0 

 

1 

1 

1 

 

1 

1 

1 

 

1 

1 

1 

 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

0 

0 

 

0 

0 

0 

 

0 

0 

0 

 

0 

0 

0 

 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 62 of 13482.10.  Building Height and Area limitations 

2.10.1. Building Height.  
 

The building height shall be measured from grade plane to the highest finish roof 
surface in the case of flat roofs or to the average height of the highest sloped roof. 

 
2.10.2. Number of Storeys.  
 

The number of storeys shall be counted starting with the first storey above grade 
plane and ending with the highest occupiable storey. 

 
2.10.3. The allowable building height and number of storeys of a building shall be deter-

mined based on the use, occupancy, and construction type of the building and shall 
not exceed the allowable heights specified in Table 1.7. and 1.8.  

 
2.10.4. Allowable Area per Storey.  
 

The allowable area per storey for any individual storey in a building shall not exceed 
the allowable area specified in Table 1.7. and 1.8.  

 
2.10.5. Total Area in Multiple Types of Construction.  
 

Where a building is constructed of two or more types of construction not separated 
by fire walls, the total area of the building shall not exceed the least maximum allow-
able building area, based on the occupancy and the types of construction of the 
building required by Table 1.7. and 1.8.  

 
2.10.6. Total Height in Multiple Types of Construction.  
 

Where two or more types of construction exist in the same building, the height of 
the entire building shall not exceed the least height permitted, based on the occu-
pancy for the types of construction used in the building, as required by Table 1.7. 
and 1.8.  

 
2.10.7. Mixed Occupancies.  
 

Buildings with mixed occupancies shall have their required type of construction de-
termined by applying the most restrictive type of construction as required by the 
occupancy to the entire building.  

 
2.10.8. Roof structures.  
 

Towers, spires, steeples and other roof structures shall be constructed of materials 
consistent with the required type of construction of the building. Such structures 
shall not be used for habitation or storage. The structures shall be unlimited in 
height if of noncombustible materials. If combustible materials are used, such struc-
tures shall not extend more than 6096 mm above the allowable building height. 

 
2.10.9. Underground Buildings. 
 

All structural members up to and including the floor of the lowest level of discharge 
of underground buildings more than 7 m below or more than one level below the 
lowest level of exit discharge shall be Type I or Type II (222) construction. 

 
2.10.10.  Mezzanines. 
 

Mezzanine complying to its definition of having an area, one-third of the floor area of 
the floor it is contained in, shall not be considered as floor in accounting allowed 
number of floors. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 63 of 1348 

 

2.10.11.  Type of Constructions required based on Civil Defence Building Categories. 
 

Table 1.7. and Table 1.8. shall be followed for construction types based on Civil 
Defence building categories. Where,  

 
 
  Area allowed is Unlimited.   
  Floors allowed is Unlimited 
  Maximum Floors allowed.  
  Ground Floor only (No above grade floors are allowed)   

 
S   
 
NS   
 
 AUL   
FUL  
 
 
 
F   
G  
 
 
xxxx m2   Maximum Allowed Area per floor in Sq meters. 
H  

  Maximum Allowed Building Height in meters. 

 

 

If building is Sprinklered.  
If Building is Not Sprinklered.    

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.10.12.   Application of Table 1.7 and Table 1.8. 
 

 

2.10.12.1.  Table 1.7 and Table 1.8. for the construction type requirements have 
been altered to suit the Civil Defence building categories. These tables 
shall be followed in conjunction with sprinkler requirements for buildings 
as per Chapter  9. Fire Protection Systems. 

 
2.10.12.2.  The area increase of 300% has already been considered for all the build-

ings that are sprinklered. 

 
2.10.12.3.  The additional area increase of 30% to the figures in Table 1.7. can be 

considered for all the sprinklered buildings which are single storey. The 
same when considered in design, shall be clearly demonstrated in the 
drawing submissions. 

 
2.10.12.4.  Where a building is sprinklered and has more than 25 % of its perimeter 

fronting or facing a public way or an open space having a minimum width 
of 6 m, additional area increase of 30% can be added to existing figures of 
Table 1.7, using the formulas from NFPA 5000, Section 7.6. The same 
when considered in design, shall be clearly demonstrated in the drawing 
submissions. 

 
2.10.12.5.  Sprinklered One storey Business, Mercantile, Assembly without stage, 
Motion picture theater, Low Hazard Storage and Low Hazard Industrial 
buildings (Group C storage and industrial) of Type II construction shall be 
allowed to be unlimited in area when  buildings are surrounded by public 
ways or yards of 18 m width. 

 
2.10.12.6.  Non-sprinklered One storey Sports arenas of Type II construction with 

automatic fire detection and alarm system shall be allowed to be unlim-
ited in area when  buildings are surrounded by public ways or yards of 18 
m width. 

 
2.10.12.7.  Fully sprinklered One storey educational occupancies shall be allowed to 
be unlimited in area when each class room has not less than 2 means of 
egress directly to outside. 

 
2.10.12.8.  Height increase shall be permitted for towers, spires, roof structures, air-

craft hangers, special purpose industrial occupancies and storage occu-
pancies when justified as per NFPA 5000, Section 7.4.3.6. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 64 of 1348 

 

 
2.10.12.9.  Reduction of construction type for Highrise buildings (23 m – 90 m in 

height) 

 

2.10.12.9.1.   For highrise buildings, other than mercantile occupancies or 

industrial and storage occupancies with ordinary and high 
hazard contents exceeding the maximum allowable quanti-
ties per control area as Chapter 13, Type I (442) construc-
tion shall be permitted to be reduced to Type I (332), and 
Type I (332) construction shall be permitted to be reduced 
to Type II (222). 

 
2.10.12.9.2.   For buildings 36.6 m or less in height containing occupan-
cies other than mercantile occupancies or industrial and 
storage occupancies with moderate and high hazard con-
tents, Type II (222) construction shall be permitted to be 
reduced to Type II (111), except that columns supporting 
more than one floor shall not be less than 2 hour fire re-
sistance rated construction. 

 

2.10.12.10. Reduction of construction type for Parking buildings 
 

2.10.12.10.1.  Heights and floor areas of ‘open parking structures’ of Type 

I (442 or 332), Type II (222), or Type II (111) construction 
shall be permitted to be unlimited. 

 
2.10.12.10.2.  Lowrise and Midrise ‘Open parking structures’ of Type II 
(000) construction shall be permitted to be of unlimited 
area. 

 
2.10.12.10.3.  Lowrise and Midrise ‘Open parking structures’ of Type II 
(000) construction shall be permitted to be of unlimited 
area. 

 
2.10.12.10.4.  A single basement or a single story above grade plane used 

 

as an ‘enclosed or open parking building’ shall be consid-
ered as a separate and distinct building for the purpose of 
determining the limitation on number of stories and type of 
construction than that of an occupancy above it, where all 
the following conditions are met. 

i.  The type of construction for structural members, in-

cluding main bracing within the ‘enclosed or open park-
ing structure, shall be of that are necessary to support 
the upper occupancy and shall be provided with the 
more restrictive fire resistance ratings of the use groups 
involved. 

 
ii.   Such single basement or a single story above grade 

plane used as an ‘enclosed or open parking building’ 
shall be of Type I (442 or 332) construction and shall be 
separated from the building above with a horizontal 
assembly having a minimum 3 hour fire resistance 
rating. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 65 of 1348 
 iii.  The building above the horizontal assembly shall 
contain only business, mercantile, storage, or resi-
dential occupancies or assembly occupancies hav-
ing an assembly room with an occupant load of less 
than 300. 

 
iv.   Shaft, stairway, ramp, or escalator enclosures 

through the horizontal assembly shall have not less 
than a 2-hour fire resistance rating, complete with 
opening protectives. 

v.  The maximum building height shall not exceed the 

limits set forth in Table 1.7 and Table 1.8. 

 
vi.  The entire structure is protected with automatic 

 

sprinkler system. 

 

2.10.12.11. Unlimited area allowance 
 

2.10.12.11.1.  Sprinklered One-Story Assembly Building used as an audito-

 

rium, church, community hall, dance hall, exhibition hall, 
gymnasium, lecture hall, indoor swimming pool, or tennis 
court of Type II construction shall not be limited in area in 
accordance with Table 1.7., where all the following criteria 
are met:  

i.  The building shall not have a theatrical stage other than 

a raised platform.  

 
ii.  The building shall be equipped with an approved, elec-

trically supervised automatic sprinkler system in ac-
cordance with Chapter 9.  

 
iii.  The assembly floor shall be located as follows:  
 

a.  At, or within, 535mm of the level of the exterior 
exit discharge accessible from the main entrance/
exit. 

b.  Within 535 mm of the level of the exterior exit dis-
charge accessible from any of the required exits for 
buildings that do not have a main entrance/exit. 

 
iv.   All exits and exit discharges shall be level or provided 

with ramps to a public way.  

 
v.   The building shall be surrounded and adjoined by public 

ways or yards not less than 18 m in width. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 66 of 1348 

Legend: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

If building is Sprinklered.  
If Building is Not Sprinklered.    

 

 
 
  Area allowed is Unlimited.   
  Floors allowed is Unlimited 
  Maximum Floors allowed.  
  Ground Floor only (No above grade floors are allowed)   

 
S   
 
NS   
 
 AUL   
 
FUL  
 
 
F   
G  
 
 
xxxx m2   Maximum Allowed Area per floor in Sq meters. 
H  

  Maximum Allowed Building Height in meters. 

 

 

Table 1.7.: Types of Constructions based on Civil Defence Building categories and occupancy types. 

OCCUPANCY  LOW DEPTH 

UNDER-
GROUND 
BUILDINGS 
< 7 m 
IN HEIGHT 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL 
 

TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL 
 
TYPE II (111) 
S,  4320 m2  

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL 
 

TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL 
 
TYPE II (111) 
S,  4320 m2 ,  F1 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL 
 

TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL 
 
TYPE II (111) 
S,  2880 m2  

1. ASSEMBLY 
   GROUP A, B. 
    OL > 1000 

2. ASSEMBLY 
   GROUP A, B. 
   OL > 300 

3. ASSEMBLY 
   GROUP A, B. 
   OL < 300 

 

HIGH DEPTH 
UNDER-
GROUND 
BUILDINGS 
> 7 m 
IN HEIGHT 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL, FUL 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL , FUL 
 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL , FUL 
 

LOW RISE  
BUILDINGS 
< 15 m 
IN HEIGHT 

MID RISE  
BUILDINGS 
15 m— < 23 m 
IN HEIGHT 

HIGHRISE  
BUILDINGS 
23 m— < 90 m 
IN HEIGHT 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL , F12 
 
TYPE II (111) 
S,  4320 m2 , F3 
 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
NS, AUL, F4 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
NS, AUL, F4 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL, F12 
NS, AUL, F4 
TYPE II (111) 
S,  4320 m2 , F4 
NS, 1440 m 2 , F3 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
NS, AUL, F7 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
NS, AUL, F7 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL, F12 
NS, AUL, F7 
TYPE II (111) 
S,  4320 m2 , F4 
NS, 1440 m 2 , F3 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL , F12 
 
TYPE II (111) 
S,  4320 m2 , F3 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
NS, AUL, F7 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
NS, AUL, F4 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL, F12 
NS, AUL, F4 
TYPE II (111) 
S, 4320 m2 , F4 
 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
NS, AUL, F7 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
NS, AUL, F7 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL, F12 
NS, AUL, F7 
TYPE II (111) 
S, 4320 m2 , F4 
 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL,  FUL 
 

TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL, F12, H55 
 
TYPE II (111) 
S,  4320 m2 , 
H26m 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL, F12, H55 
 
TYPE II (111) 
S, 4320 m2 , 
H26m 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL, F12, H55 
 
TYPE II (111) 
S, 4320 m2 , 
H26m 

SUPER  
HIGH RISE 
BUILDING 
> 90 m 
IN HEIGHT 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, H128m 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, H128m 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, H128m 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 67 of 1348 

 Table 1.7.: Types of Constructions based on Civil Defence Building categories and occupancy types. 

OCCUPANCY 

4. ASSEMBLY 
    GROUP C 

5. BUSINESS 

6. EDUCATIO-    

NAL 

7.HEALTH 
CARE 
GROUP A, B 

8. HEALTH 
CARE  
GROUP C 

 

LOW DEPTH 
UNDER-
GROUND 
BUILDINGS 
< 7 m 
IN HEIGHT 

HIGH DEPTH 
UNDER-
GROUND 
BUILDINGS 
> 7 m 
IN HEIGHT 

LOW RISE  
BUILDINGS 
< 15 m 
IN HEIGHT 

MID RISE  
BUILDINGS 
15 m— < 23 m 
IN HEIGHT 

HIGHRISE  
BUILDINGS 
23 m— < 90 m 
IN HEIGHT 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL 
 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL , FUL 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL , FUL 
 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL , FUL 
 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL , FUL 
 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL 
TYPE II (111) 
S,  4320 m2 ,F1 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL 
NS, AUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL 
NS, AUL 
 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL 
NS, AUL 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL 
 

TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL 
 
TYPE II (111) 
S,  7386 m2  

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL 
 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL 
 

TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL 
NS, AUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL 
NS, AUL 
 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL 
NS, AUL 

TYPE I (442) 
TYPE I (332) 
TYPE II (222) 
TYPE II (111) 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
NS, AUL, FUL 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
NS, AUL, UL 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL, F12 
NS, AUL, F11 
TYPE II (111) 
S, 10452 m2 , F6 
NS, 3484 m 2 , F5 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
NS, 1680 m 2 , F3 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
NS, 1680 m 2 , F3 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL , F12 
NS, 1680 m 2 , F3 
TYPE II (111) 
S, 7386 m2 ,  F4 
NS, 1680 m 2 , F3 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL, F12 
TYPE II (111) 
S,  4182 m2 , F3 
NS, 1394 m 2 , G 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
NS, AUL, FUL 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
NS, AUL, FUL 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL, F12 
NS, AUL, F11 
TYPE II (111) 
S, 10452 m2 , F6 
NS, 3484 m2 , F5 

TYPE I (442) 
TYPE I (332) 
TYPE II (222) 
 
TYPE II(111) 
S, 4320 m2 , F4 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
NS, AUL, FUL 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
NS, AUL, UL 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL, F12 
NS, AUL, F11 
TYPE II (111) 
S, 10452 m2 , F6 
NS, 3484 m 2 , F5 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL , F12 
 
TYPE II (111) 
S, 7386 m2 ,  F4 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL, F12 
TYPE II (111) 
S,  4182 m2 , F3 
 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
NS, AUL, FUL 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
NS, AUL, FUL 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL, F12 
NS, AUL, F11 
TYPE II (111) 
S, 10452 m2 , F6 
NS, 3484 m2 , F5 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL, H55 
TYPE II(111) 
S,4320 m2,H26m 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL , F12, H55 
 
TYPE II (111) 
S, 10452 m2 , 
H26m 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL , F12, H55 
 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL, F12, H55 
 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL, F12, H55 
 
TYPE II (111) 
S, 10452 m2 , 
H26m 

SUPER  
HIGH RISE 
BUILDING 
> 90 m 
IN HEIGHT 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, H128m 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, H128m 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, H128m 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, H128m 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, H128m 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 68 of 1348 

Table 1.7.: Types of Constructions based on Civil Defence Building categories and occupancy types. 

LOW RISE  
BUILDINGS 
< 15 m 
IN HEIGHT 

MID RISE  
BUILDINGS 
15 m— < 23 m 
IN HEIGHT 

HIGHRISE  
BUILDINGS 
23 m— < 90 m 
IN HEIGHT 

HIGH DEPTH 
UNDER-
GROUND 
BUILDINGS 
> 7 m 
IN HEIGHT 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL , FUL 
 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL , FUL 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL , FUL 
 
TYPE II (222) 
S, 3627 m2 , FUL 
 

TYPE II (111) 
S,  AUL , F5 
NS, AUL , F4 
 
TYPE II (000) 
S,  AUL , F5 
NS, AUL , F4 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL , FUL 
 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL , FUL 
 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 

OCCUPANCY  LOW DEPTH 

UNDER-
GROUND 
BUILDINGS 
< 7 m 
IN HEIGHT 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL 
NS, AUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL 
NS, AUL 
 

TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL 
NS, AUL 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL 
NS, AUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL 
NS, 2418 m2 
 

TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL 
NS, 2418 m2 

TYPE II (111) 
S,  AUL , F5 
NS, AUL , F4 
 
TYPE II (000) 
S,  AUL , F5 
NS, AUL , F4 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL 
NS, AUL 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL 
NS, AUL 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL 
NS, AUL 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL 
 

TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL 
 
TYPE II (111) 
S, 4182 m2  

9. RESIDEN-
TIAL 
GROUP A, C 

10. RESIDEN-
TIAL 
GROUP B 

11. PRIVATE  
       VILLAS 

12. COM-
MERCIAL  
VILLAS 

13. DETEN-
TION  
CORRECTION 

 

 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
NS, AUL, FUL 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
NS, AUL, FUL 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL, F12 
NS, AUL, F11 
TYPE II (111) 
S,  6690 m2 , F5 
NS, 2230 m 2 , F4 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
NS, AUL, F3 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
NS, AUL, F3 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL, F12 
NS, AUL, F3 
TYPE II (111) 
S,  5441 m2 , F3 
NS, 2230 m 2 , F3 

TYPE II (111) 
S,  AUL , F5 
NS, AUL , F4 
 
TYPE II (000) 
S,  AUL , F5 
NS, AUL , F4 

TYPE II (111) 
S,  AUL , F5 
NS, AUL , F4 
 
TYPE II (000) 
S,  AUL , F5 
NS, AUL , F4 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
NS, AUL, F7 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
NS, AUL, F7 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL, F12 
NS, AUL, F7 
TYPE II (111) 
S,  4182 m2 , F2 
NS, 1394 m2 , F2 

SUPER  
HIGH RISE 
BUILDING 
> 90 m 
IN HEIGHT 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, H128m 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
NS, AUL, FUL 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
NS, AUL,FUL 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL, F12 
NS, AUL,F11 
TYPE II (111) 
S, 6690 m2 , F5 
NS, 2230 m 2, 
H20m 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL, F12 
 
TYPE II (111) 
S, 6690 m2 , 
H26m 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL, F12 
 
TYPE II (111) 
S,  5441 m2 , 
H20m 

TYPE II (111) 
S,  AUL , F5 
NS, AUL , F4 
 
TYPE II (000) 
S,  AUL , F5 
 

TYPE II (111) 
S,  AUL , F5 
NS, AUL , F4 
 
TYPE II (000) 
S,  AUL , F5 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL, F12 
 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, H128m 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE II (222) 
S, 6690 m2 , F12, 
H55 

 

 

 

 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, H128m 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL, F12, H55 
 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 69 of 1348 

Table 1.7.: Types of Constructions based on Civil Defence Building categories and occupancy types. 

OCCUPANCY  LOW DEPTH 

14. HOTEL 

UNDER-
GROUND 
BUILDINGS 
< 7 m 
IN HEIGHT 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL 
NS, AUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL 
NS, AUL 
 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL 
NS, AUL 

15. DAY CARE  TYPE I (442) 

S, AUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S,  AUL 
 

TYPE II (222) 
S, 16863 m2 
 
TYPE II (111) 
S,  7386 m2  

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL 
NS, AUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL 
NS, AUL 
 

TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL 
NS, AUL 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL 
NS, AUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL 
NS, AUL 
 

TYPE II (222) 
S, 13377 m2  
NS, 4459 m2  

16. MERCAN-
TILE 

17. STORAGE 
      GROUP B 

HIGH DEPTH 
UNDER-
GROUND 
BUILDINGS 
> 7 m 
IN HEIGHT 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL , FUL 
 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE II (222) 
S,16863 m2 , FUL 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL , FUL 
 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE II (222) 
S, 13377 m2 , 
FUL 
 

LOW RISE  
BUILDINGS 
< 15 m 
IN HEIGHT 

MID RISE  
BUILDINGS 
15 m— < 23 m 
IN HEIGHT 

HIGHRISE  
BUILDINGS 
23 m— < 90 m 
IN HEIGHT 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
NS, AUL, G 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
NS, AUL, G 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL, F12 
NS, AUL, G 
TYPE II (111) 
S,  6690 m2 , F5 
NS, 2230 m 2 , G 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
NS, AUL, F2 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
NS, AUL, F2 
TYPE II (222) 
S,16863 m2 , F12 
NS, 5621 m2, F2 
TYPE II (111) 
S, 7386 m2 , F6 
NS, 2462 m2 , F1 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
NS, AUL, FUL 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
NS, AUL, FUL 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL, F12 
NS, AUL, F11 
TYPE II (111) 
S,  5991 m2 , F5 
NS, 1997 m2 , F4 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL , F12 
 
TYPE II (111) 
S,  6690 m2 , F5 
 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE II (222) 
S,16863 m2 , F12 
 
TYPE II (111) 
S,  7386 m2 , F6 
 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL, F12, H55 
 
TYPE II (111) 
S,  6690 m2 ,  
H26m 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE II (222) 
S,16863 m2 , 
F12, H55 
 
TYPE II (111) 
S,  7386 m2 , 
H26m 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
NS, AUL, FUL 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
NS, AUL, FUL 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL, F12 
NS, AUL, F11 
TYPE II (111) 
S,  5991 m2 , F5 
NS, 1997 m2 , 
H20m 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE II (222) 
S, 3994 m2 , F12, 
H55 
 
TYPE II (111) 
S,  5991 m2 , 
H26m 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
NS, AUL, FUL 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
NS, AUL, FUL 
TYPE II (222) 
S, 13377 m2 , F12 
NS, 4459 m2, F11 
TYPE II (111) 
S, 7245  m2 , F5 
NS, 2415 m2 , F4 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
NS, AUL, FUL 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
NS, AUL, FUL 
TYPE II (222) 
S,13377 m2 , F12 
NS,4459 m2, F11 
TYPE II (111) 
S,  5991 m2 , F5 
NS, 2415 m2 , 
H20m 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE II (222) 
S,13377 m2 , 
F12, H55 
 
TYPE II (111) 
S, 7245 m2 , 
H26m 

SUPER  
HIGH RISE 
BUILDING 
> 90 m 
IN HEIGHT 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, H128m 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, H128m 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, H128m 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, H128m 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 70 of 1348 

Table 1.7.: Types of Constructions based on Civil Defence Building categories and occupancy types. 

OCCUPANCY  LOW DEPTH 

UNDER-
GROUND 
BUILDINGS 
< 7 m 
IN HEIGHT 

18. STORAGE     
GROUP C 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL 
NS, AUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL 
NS, AUL 
 

HIGH DEPTH 
UNDER-
GROUND 
BUILDINGS 
> 7 m 
IN HEIGHT 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL , FUL 
 
TYPE II (222) 
S,22017 m2 , FUL 

TYPE II (222) 
S, 22017 m2 
NS, 7339 m2 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL 
NS, AUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL 
NS, 2418 m2 
 

TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL 
NS, 2418 m2 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL 
NS, AUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL 
NS, AUL 
 

TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL 
NS, AUL 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL 
NS, AUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL 
NS, AUL 
 

TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL 
NS, AUL 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, 6696 m2 
 

TYPE II (222) 
S, 5441 m2 
 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL , FUL 
 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 

19. PARKING 
STRUCTURES 

20. INDUS-
TRIAL  
GROUP B 

21. INDUS-
TRIAL  
GROUP C 

 

 

SUPER  
HIGH RISE 
BUILDING 
> 90 m 
IN HEIGHT 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, H128m 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, H128m 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, H128m 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, H128m 

LOW RISE  
BUILDINGS 
< 15 m 
IN HEIGHT 

MID RISE  
BUILDINGS 
15 m— < 23 m 
IN HEIGHT 

HIGHRISE  
BUILDINGS 
23 m— < 90 m 
IN HEIGHT 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
NS, AUL, FUL 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
NS, AUL, FUL 
TYPE II (222) 
S, 22017 m2 , F12 
NS, 7339 m2, F11 
TYPE II (111) 
S, 10869 m2 , F6 
NS, 3623 m2 , F5 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
NS, AUL, FUL 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
NS, AUL, FUL 
TYPE II (222) 
S,22017 m2 , F12 
NS,7339 m2, F11 
TYPE II (111) 
S, 10869 m2 , F6 
NS, 3623 m2 , F5 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL 
NS, AUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL 
NS, 2418 m2 
 

TYPE II (222) 
S, 5441 m2 
NS, 2418 m2 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
NS, AUL, FUL 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
NS, AUL, FUL 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL, F12 
NS, AUL, F11 
TYPE II (111) 
S, 6969 m2 , F5 
NS, 2323 m2 , F4 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
NS, AUL, FUL 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
NS, AUL, FUL 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL, F12 
NS, AUL, F11 
TYPE II (111) 
S, 10452 m2 , F6 
NS, 3484 m2 , F5 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL 
NS, AUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL 
NS, 2418 m2 
 

TYPE II (222) 
S, 5441 m2 
NS, 2418 m2 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
NS, AUL, FUL 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
NS, AUL, FUL 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL, F12 
NS, AUL, F11 
TYPE II (111) 
S, 6969 m2 , F5 
NS, 2323 m2 , 
H20m 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
NS, AUL, FUL 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
NS, AUL, FUL 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL, F12 
NS, AUL, F11 
TYPE II (111) 
S, 10452 m2 , F6 
NS, 3484 m2 , 
H20m 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE II (222) 
S,22017 m2 , 
F12, H55 
 
TYPE II (111) 
S, 10869 m2 , 
H26m 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE II (222) 
S,13377 m2  
F12, H55 
 
 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL, F12, H55 
 
TYPE II (111) 
S, 6969 m2 , 
H26m 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE II (222) 
S, AUL, F12, H55 
 
TYPE II (111) 
S, 10452 m2 , 
H26m 
 
 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 71 of 1348Table 1.8.: Types of Constructions based on Civil Defence Industrial Group A and Storage Group A Occupancies (Hazardous). 

LOW RISE  
BUILDINGS 
< 15 m 
IN HEIGHT 

MID RISE  
BUILDINGS 
15 m— < 23 m 
IN HEIGHT 

HIGHRISE  
BUILDINGS 
23 m— < 90 m 
IN HEIGHT 

SUPER  
HIGH RISE 
BUILDING 
> 90 m 
IN HEIGHT 

Not Allowed 

Not Allowed 

Not Allowed 
 
 
 

Not Allowed 

Not Allowed 

Not Allowed 

Not Allowed 

Not Allowed 
 
 
 

Not Allowed 

Not Allowed 

Not Allowed 

Not Allowed 

OCCUPANCY  LOW DEPTH 

UNDER-
GROUND 
BUILDINGS 
< 7 m 
IN HEIGHT 

HIGH DEPTH 
UNDER-
GROUND 
BUILDINGS 
> 7 m 
IN HEIGHT 

22. STORAGE 
GROUP A-1 

Not Allowed 

Not Allowed 

23. STORAGE  
GROUP A-2 

Not Allowed 

Not Allowed 

Not Allowed 

Not Allowed 

24. INDUS-
TRIAL GROUP 
A-1 

Not Allowed 

Not Allowed 

25. INDUS-
TRIAL  
GROUP A-2 

TYPE I (442) 
S, 5853 m2, F1 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, 5853 m2, F1 
 
TYPE II (222) 
S, 4599  m2 , F1 
 
TYPE II (111) 
S, 3066  m2 , F1 
 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE II (222) 
S, 4599 m2 , F3 
 
TYPE II (111) 
S,  3066 m2 , F2 
 

TYPE I (442) 
S, 5853 m2, F1 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, 5853 m2, F1 
 
TYPE II (222) 
S, 4599  m2 , F1 
 
TYPE II (111) 
S, 3066  m2 , F1 

TYPE I (442) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE I (332) 
S, AUL, FUL 
 
TYPE II (222) 
S, 4599 m2 , F3 
 
TYPE II (111) 
S,  3066 m2 , F2 

2.9.11.  Note. 
 

Table 1.8. applies only to occupancies holding Hazardous Material quantities that 
exceed Maximum Allowed Quantities (MAQ) as required by Chapter 13.  

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 72 of 1348 

2.11.  Separation of incidental accessory Rooms and Occupancies 

2.11.1.  Incidental accessory occupancies are those occupancies that are ancillary to the 

main occupancy of the building or portion thereof and shall comply with Table 1.9. 

 
2.11.2.  Table 1.9.  also provides separation between certain occupancies and shall be com-

plied with. See Table 1.2. for separation requirements between occupancies.  

 
2.11.3.  Such Occupancy and incidental accessory room separations shall be vertical, hori-

zontal, or both or, when necessary, of such other form as required to provide com-
plete separation between occupancy divisions in the building. 

Table 1.9: Fire Resistance Separation and other requirement of incidental accessory /Occupancies. 

INCIDENTAL  
ACCESSORY 
ROOMS AND  
OCCUPANCIES 

REQUIRED 
SEPARATION 
WITH  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

REQUIRED 
SEPARATION 
WITHOUT  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

OTHER  CONSTRUCTION AND PROTECTION 
REQUIREMENTS 
 
(See  
Chapter 9 for Fire Protection requirements 
Chapter 10 for smoke control requirements) 

1.  EMERGENCY         

1 Hour 

2 Hour 

i.  Fire Command Center shall be provided to the follow-

COMMAND 
CENTER 

 
 

ing occupancies. 
a.  Highrise and Super highrise buildings. 
b.  Malls. 
c.  Amusement and Theme Parks 

ii.  Fire Command Center shall have a minimum size of 

19 m2 with minimum dimension of 3 m. 

iii.  Emergency Command Center shall be located at the    

entrance side of the building and along fire access-
way. 

iv. Emergency Command Center shall be permitted to be 

utilized as building security, BMS, Facility manage-
ment office or building control room. 

2. FIRE PUMP 

2 Hour 

2 Hour 

i.  Pump Room shall be located anywhere between 

ROOM 

 
 

 

ground floor near Fire access road to the lowest level 
of the building, within 6m and visible location from 
Exit stair leading to ground floor from that level. 

ii.  Pump Room shall have direct and standard access 

way/Stair, door with 2300 mm Headroom. Hatch en-
try, Cat ladders, Spiral Stairs, Winding Stairs are not 
allowed to access Fire Pump Room. 

iii. Minimum Pump Room height shall be 2.5 m and area 

for Horizontal pumpset shall be as follows. 
a.  3m X 3m For 50 gpm pump set 
b.  3m X 4m For 100 gpm pump set. 
c.  4m X 4m For up to 500 gpm pump set. 
d.  5m X 6m For up to 1500 gpm pump set. 
e.  6m X 6m For more than 1500 gpm pump set 

iv. Minimum Pump Room size and height for Vertical 

Turbine  pumpset shall be as follows. 
a.  3m X 3m X 2.5m Ht  For 50 gpm pumpset 
b.  3m X 4m X 3m Ht For 100 gpm pumpset. 
c.  4m X 4m X 3m Ht For up to 500 gpm pumpset. 
d.  5m X 6m X 3.5m Ht For up to 1500 gpm pump set. 
e.  6m X 6m X 3.5m Ht For more than 1500 gpm 

pump set 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 73 of 1348 

Table 1.9: Fire Resistance Separation and other requirement of incidental accessory /Occupancies. 

INCIDENTAL  
ACCESSORY ROOMS 
AND OCCUPANCIES 

REQUIRED 
SEPARATION 
WITH  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

REQUIRED 
SEPARATION 
WITHOUT  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

OTHER  CONSTRUCTION AND PROTECTION 
REQUIREMENTS 
 
(See  
Chapter 9 for Fire Protection requirements 
Chapter 10 for smoke control requirements) 

3.A. FIRE WATER 

0 Hour 

0 Hour 

i.  Fire water tank shall be next to the Fire pump 

TANK 

         FOR                  
HORIZONTAL 
PUMP 

 
 

 

room, horizontally. 

ii.  Tank Materials are limited to Concrete, Steel or 

Fiberglass reinforced plastic and shall with-
stand the unit weight of water of 1000 kg per 
cubic meter. 

iii. Where water tank is not constructed with con-

crete, the water tank shall be Civil Defence 
listed and approved. 

iv. Fire water tank shall have 2 internal equal com-
partments, connected with isolation valves for 
tank cleaning and maintenance purpose with-
out compromising whole water reserve. 

v.  Pump suction shall be from both compart-

ments through a common header. 

vi. Water tank sizes shall be based on fire pump 

capacity and duration as per Chapter 9. 

vii.Fire water tank shall be permitted to be com-
bined with domestic water capacity, provided 
fire water capacity is maintained and ensured 
at all times. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 1.3A: Water Tank and Fire Pump Arrangement for Horizontal Pump 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 74 of 1348 

Table 1.9: Fire Resistance Separation and other requirement of incidental accessory /Occupancies. 

INCIDENTAL  
ACCESSORY ROOMS 
AND OCCUPANCIES 

3.B. FIRE WATER 
TANK  FOR    
VERTICAL  

        TURBINE PUMP 
 
 

REQUIRED 
SEPARATION 
WITH  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

REQUIRED 
SEPARATION 
WITHOUT  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

OTHER  CONSTRUCTION AND PROTECTION 
REQUIREMENTS 
 
(See  
Chapter 9 for Fire Protection requirements 
Chapter 10 for smoke control requirements) 

0 Hour 

0 Hour 

i.  Fire water tank shall be directly below the 

pump suction for vertical turbine type pump-
set. 

ii.  Tank Materials are limited to Concrete, Steel or 

Fiberglass reinforced plastic and shall with-
stand the unit weight of water of 1000 kg per 
cubic meter. 

iii. Where water tank is not constructed with con-

crete, the water tank shall be Civil Defence 
listed and approved. 

iv. Fire water tank shall have 2 internal equal com-
partments, connected with isolation valves for 
tank cleaning and maintenance purpose with-
out compromising whole water reserve. 

v.  Pump suction shall be from sump pit. 
vi. Water tank sizes shall be based on fire pump 

capacity and duration as per Chapter 9. 

vii.Fire water tank shall be permitted to be com-
bined with domestic water capacity, provided 
fire water capacity is maintained and ensured 
at all times. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 1.3B: Water Tank and Fire Pump Arrangement for Vertical Turbine Pump 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 75 of 1348 

 

Table 1.9: Fire Resistance Separation and other requirement of incidental accessory /Occupancies. 

INCIDENTAL  
ACCESSORY ROOMS 
AND OCCUPANCIES 

REQUIRED 
SEPARATION 
WITH  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

REQUIRED 
SEPARATION 
WITHOUT  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

OTHER  CONSTRUCTION AND PROTECTION 
REQUIREMENTS 
 
(See  
Chapter 9 for Fire Protection requirements 
Chapter 10 for smoke control requirements) 

4.  KITCHEN 
      RESTAURANTS 
      KITCHEN—

COMMERCIAL 

 
 

 

0 Hour 

1 Hour 

i.  Kitchens having area more than 150 m2 shall be 

provided with automatic sprinkler system. 

ii.  Doors shall be 30 min fire rated and self clos-

ing. 

iii. Kitchen-hood suppression shall be provided. 
iv. Show/Open Kitchens shall be provided with 1 
hour Fire rated Smoke partition (Glazing) to be 
separated from seating, open, circulation areas. 

v.  Kitchen shall be permitted to be in the base-
ment, but not LPG Cylinders or storage tank. 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 1.4: Separation of Kitchen 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 76 of 1348 

 

Table 1.9.: Fire Resistance Separation and other requirement of incidental accessory /Occupancies. 

INCIDENTAL  
ACCESSORY ROOMS 
AND OCCUPANCIES 

REQUIRED 
SEPARATION 
WITH  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

REQUIRED 
SEPARATION 
WITHOUT  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

OTHER  CONSTRUCTION AND PROTECTION 
REQUIREMENTS 
 
(See  
Chapter 9 for Fire Protection requirements 
Chapter 10 for smoke control requirements) 

1 Hour 

2 Hour 

i.  Separation and Compartmentation shall be 

complete with walls, floor, doors and opening 
protection. 

ii.  Where entrance access to Assembly Group A is 

from other occupancies, it shall be protected 
with fire doors. 

iii. Where a lobby between Assembly Group A and 
other occupancies is required, such lobby shall 
be 1 hour fire resistance rated with self closing 
door, 1 hour fire rated. 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 1.5: Separation of Cinema, Nightclub, Concert Hall 

5.  ASSEMBLY  

GROUP A 

     (THEATER,         

CINEMA, CONCERT 
HALL, NIGHTCLUBS 
ETC.) 

 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 77 of 1348 

 

Table 1.9.: Fire Resistance Separation and other requirement of incidental accessory /Occupancies. 

INCIDENTAL  
ACCESSORY ROOMS 
AND OCCUPANCIES 

REQUIRED 
SEPARATION 
WITH  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

REQUIRED 
SEPARATION 
WITHOUT  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

OTHER  CONSTRUCTION AND PROTECTION 
REQUIREMENTS 
 
(See  
Chapter 9 for Fire Protection requirements 
Chapter 10 for smoke control requirements) 

6.  RETAIL UNIT  

1 Hour 

1 Hour 

i.  The separation is between retail units. Front of 

the retail unit if opens to enclosed mall, open 
mall, circulation areas, need not be fire re-
sistance rated. 

7.  COLD ROOM > 

1 Hour 

2 Hour 

i.  Separation and Compartmentation shall be 

20M2 

 
 

8. STAFF 
    ACCOMMODATION  

9. LABOR  
    ACCOMMODATION  

complete with walls, floor and opening protec-
tion with non-combustible and approved con-
struction materials. 

ii.  Fire door shall be 1 hour fire rated. 

1 Hour 

1 Hour 

i.  The separation is between labor dwelling units. 

Front side, including the door of the dwelling 
unit if opens to open corridor or open circula-
tion areas, need not be fire resistance rated. 

1 Hour 

1 Hour 

i.  The separation is between labor dwelling units. 

Where front side, including the door of the 
dwelling unit if opens to open corridor or open 
circulation areas, need not be fire resistance 
rated.  

ii.  Kitchens shall be separated from rest of the 
areas with 1 hour fire resistance rated con-
struction. 

10.  APARTMENT 

1 Hour 

1 Hour 

i.  Separation and Compartmentation shall be 

UNIT  

 
 

complete with walls, floor, doors and opening 
protection. 

ii.  Main door shall be 60 minutes fire rated. 

11.  HOTEL            

1 Hour 

1 Hour 

i.  Separation and Compartmentation shall be 

BEDROOM 

 
 

complete with walls, floor, doors and opening 
protection. 

ii.  Main door shall be 60 minutes fire rated. 

12.  STORAGE 

1 Hour 

2 Hour 

ROOMS   > 9.3 M2 

i.  See Chapter 9 for Firefighting requirements. 
ii.  See Chapter 10 for Smoke Control require-

 
 

13.  AHU ROOM 
 
 

 

ments. 

1 Hour 

1 Hour 

i.  See Chapter 9 for Firefighting requirements. 
ii.  See Chapter 10 for Smoke Control require-

ments. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 78 of 1348 

Table 1.9.: Fire Resistance Separation and other requirement of incidental accessory /Occupancies. 

 

REQUIRED 
SEPARATION 
WITH  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE 
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

REQUIRED 
SEPARATION 
WITHOUT  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE 
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

1 Hour 

2 Hour 

INCIDENTAL  
ACCESSORY ROOMS 
AND OCCUPANCIES 

14. EMERGENCY      
LIGHTING          
BATTERY ROOM/ 
UPS ROOM 

OTHER  CONSTRUCTION AND PROTECTION 
REQUIREMENTS 
 
(See Chapter 9 for Fire Protection requirements 
Chapter 10 for smoke control requirements) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

15.  GENERATOR 

2 Hour 

2 Hour 

i.  Generator Room shall be located above grade 

 

ROOM 

16.  LOW VOLTAGE   
SWITCH ROOM 
(LV) 

 

 

 

i.  Ventilation shall be provided for battery stor-

age room and the UPS room. 

ii.  Fire door shall be 60 minutes fire rated. 

 

level, on the exterior perimeter of the building. 

ii.  Where located below grade, shall be on the 
perimeter of the space such that supply and 
exhaust can be achieved to exterior directly . 

 

iii. Where located below grade, shall be separated 
from rest of the area by the required fire rating 
and motorized louvers or fire curtains shall be 
provided to achieve the required fire rating. 

 

 

iv. Maximum Diesel Fuel allowed inside the Gen-

erator Room is 2498 L (660 gal). 

 

v.  Generator room shall not be permitted on the 

roof of the building. 

2 Hour 

2 Hour 

i.  LV Room shall be located above grade level, on 

the exterior perimeter of the building. 

ii.  When located on the perimeter of the build-

ing, the separation shall be between LV room 
and other occupancies. Front side of the room 
exposed to exterior, need not be fire rated. 
iii. LV Rooms protected with Automatic Clean 

agent systems should have motorized louvers. 
iv. Door shall be 90 minutes Fire resistance rated 

with motorized louvers, where the room 
doesn't open to exterior of the building. 

v.  Where located below grade, shall be on the 
perimeter of the space such that supply and 
exhaust can be achieved to exterior directly . 

vi. Where located below grade, shall be separated 
from rest of the area by the required fire rating 
and motorized louvers or fire curtains shall be 
provided to achieve the required fire rating. 

17. TRANSFORMER  

2 Hour 

2 Hour 

i.  Transformer /HV Room shall be located above 

ROOM AND HIGH 
VOLTAGE ROOM  

 

grade level, on the exterior perimeter of the 
building. 

ii.  When located on the perimeter of the build-

ing, the separation shall be between trans-
former/ HV room and other occupancies. Front 
side of the room exposed to exterior need not 
be fire rated. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 79 of 1348 

 

Table 1.9.: Fire Resistance Separation and other requirement of incidental accessory /Occupancies. 

 

INCIDENTAL  
ACCESSORY ROOMS 
AND OCCUPANCIES 

REQUIRED 
SEPARATION 
WITH  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE 
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

REQUIRED 
SEPARATION 
WITHOUT  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE 
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

 

 

 

OTHER  CONSTRUCTION AND PROTECTION 
REQUIREMENTS 
 
(See Chapter 9 for Fire Protection requirements 
Chapter 10 for smoke control requirements) 

iii. Door shall be 90 minutes Fire resistance rated 

with motorized louvers, where the room 
doesn't open to exterior of the building. 

 

 

 

iv. Where located below grade, shall be on the 
perimeter of the space such that supply and 
exhaust can be achieved to exterior directly . 
v.  Where located below grade, shall be separat-
ed from rest of the area by the required fire 
rating and motorized louvers or fire curtains 
shall be provided to achieve the required fire 
 
rating. 

 

 

18. RMU (RING MAIN 

2 Hour 

2 Hour 

i.  RMU Room shall be located above grade level, 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

UNIT) ROOM  

on the exterior perimeter of the building. 

ii.  When located on the perimeter of the build-

 

ing, the separation shall be between RMU 
room and other occupancies. Front side of the 
room exposed to exterior need not be fire rat-
ed. 

iii. RMU Rooms protected with Automatic Clean 

agent systems should have motorized louvers. 
iv. Door shall be 90 minutes Fire resistance rated 

where the room doesn't open to exterior of 
the building. 

19.  MDF (MAIN     
DISTRIBUTION 
FRAME) ROOM  
AND MMR ROOM 
(MEET ME 
ROOM) 

1 Hour 

2 Hour 

i.  MDF Room shall be protected in accordance 

with Chapter 9, Table 9.30. 

ii.  Door shall be 90 minutes Fire resistance rated 

where the room doesn't open to exterior of 
the building. 

20. BOILER ROOM 

1 Hour 

2 Hour 

i.  Separation and Compartmentation shall be 

complete with walls, floor and opening protec-
tion.  

ii.  Fire door shall be 60 minutes fire rated. 

21. A/C PLANT ROOM  1 Hour 

1 Hour 

i.  Separation and Compartmentation shall be 

complete with walls, floor and opening protec-
tion. 

ii.  Fire door shall be 60 minutes fire rated. 

22. BULK LAUNDRY 

1 Hour 

2 Hour 

i.  Separation and Compartmentation shall be 

ROOM 

complete with walls, floor and opening protec-
tion. 

ii.  Fire door shall be 60 minutes fire rated. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 80 of 1348 

 

Table 1.9.: Fire Resistance Separation and other requirement of incidental accessory /Occupancies. 

INCIDENTAL  
ACCESSORY ROOMS 
AND OCCUPANCIES 

REQUIRED 
SEPARATION 
WITH  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

REQUIRED 
SEPARATION 
WITHOUT  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

OTHER  CONSTRUCTION AND PROTECTION 
REQUIREMENTS 
 
(See  
Chapter 9 for Fire Protection requirements 
Chapter 10 for smoke control requirements) 

23. GARBAGE ROOM             
 
 

1 Hour 

2 Hour 

i.  Garbage Room shall be located above grade 

level, on the exterior perimeter of the building. 

ii.  Separation and Compartmentation shall be 

complete with walls, floor and opening protec-
tion. 

iii. Fire door shall be 60 minutes fire rated. 

24. LABORATORIES 

1 Hour 

2 Hour 

i.  Separation and Compartmentation shall be 

USING          
FLAMMABLE OR 
COMBUSTIBLE     
LIQUID (See 
Chapter 13. Flam-
mable Liquids 
and Hazardous 
materials) 

complete with walls, floor and opening protec-
tion. 

ii.  Fire door shall be 60 minutes fire rated. 

25. PAINT SHOPS 

1 Hour 

2 Hour 

i.  Separation and Compartmentation shall be 

complete with walls, floor and opening protec-
tion. 

ii.  Fire door shall be 60 minutes fire rated. 

26. PAINT BOOTHS 

1 Hour 

2 Hour 

i.  Separation and Compartmentation shall be 

(SPRAY) 

 
 

27. GIFT SHOPS 

1 Hour 

1 Hour 

complete with walls, floor and opening protec-
tion with non-combustible and approved con-
struction materials. 

ii.  Vapor extract System shall be provided. 

i.  The separation is between gift shop and other 
occupancies. Front of the gift shop if opens to 
enclosed mall, open mall, circulation areas, 
need not be fire resistance rated. 

28. MAINTENANCE 

1 Hour 

2 Hour 

WORKSHOPS 

i.  See Chapter 9 for Firefighting requirements. 
ii.  See Chapter 10 for Smoke Control require-

ments. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 81 of 1348 

Table 1.9: Fire Resistance Separation and other requirement of incidental accessory /Occupancies. 

REQUIRED 
SEPARATION 
WITH  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

REQUIRED 
SEPARATION 
WITHOUT  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

2 Hour 

2 Hour 

INCIDENTAL  
ACCESSORY ROOMS AND 
OCCUPANCIES 

29. GROUP A STORAGE 
      EXPLOSIVES,  
      DETONABLE  
      PYROPHORIC  
      MATERIALS, 
      BLASTING AGENTS 
      < 100 KG 
 
More than 100 kg shall 
have risk assessment and 
shall comply with Chapter 
13, NFPA 5000 and NFPA 
294. 

OTHER  CONSTRUCTION AND PROTECTION 
REQUIREMENTS 
 
(See  
Chapter 9 for Fire Protection requirements 
Chapter 10 for smoke control requirements) 

i.  Storage shall be in a separate building 
without basements and a maximum of 
one floor. 

ii.  This dedicated building shall be mini-
mum of   23 m away from other build-
ings and property line. 

iii. Separation and Compartmentation shall 
be complete with walls, floor , roof and 
opening protection. 

iv. Door shall be 90 minutes fire rated , self 
closing and directly outside available on 
Fire accessway. 

v.  Rolling shutters shall be 90 minutes rat-
ed and shall be closed automatically up-
on receiving fire signal. 

vi. Vapor exhaust system shall be provided. 
vii.Steel structure fire rating shall not be 

required. 

30. GROUP A STORAGE               

1 Hour 

2 Hour 

i.  Storage room shall be 9 m away from 

MATERIALS STORE 
ROOM (FLAMMABLE 
AND COMBUSTIBLE 
MATERIALS) 

       > 93 M2 IN AREA. 
 
Rooms exceeding MAQ, as 
per chapter 13, shall have 
risk assessment and shall 
comply with Chapter 13, 
NFPA 5000 and NFPA 30. 

 

property line. 

ii.  Storage room shall not be in the base-

ment. 

iii. Separation and Compartmentation shall 
be complete with walls, floor , roof and 
opening protection. 

iv. Door shall be 90 minutes fire rated , self 
closing and directly outside available on 
Fire accessway.. 

v.  Rolling shutters shall be 90 minutes rat-
ed and shall be closed automatically up-
on receiving fire signal. 

vi. Vapor exhaust system shall be provided. 
vii.Steel structure fire rating shall not be 

required. 

 
 
 
 
 

HIGH HAZARD WAREHOUSES FOR ILLUSTRATION 

 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 82 of 1348 

Table 1.9: Fire Resistance Separation and other requirement of incidental accessory /Occupancies. 

INCIDENTAL  
ACCESSORY ROOMS 
AND OCCUPANCIES 

REQUIRED  
SEPARATION 
WITH  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

REQUIRED 
SEPARATION 
WITHOUT  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

OTHER  CONSTRUCTION AND PROTECTION 
REQUIREMENTS 
 
(See  
Chapter 9 for Fire Protection requirements 
Chapter 10 for smoke control requirements) 

31. MULTI-TENANT 

1 Hour 

2 Hour 

WAREHOUSE 
AND               
MULTITENANT    
FACTORIES 

 

i.  Separation and Compartmentation shall be 
complete with walls, floor, roof and opening 
protection. 

ii.  Separation between warehouse units shall ex-

tend above the roof to 760 mm. 

iii. Door shall be 60 minutes fire rated and self 

closing. 

iv. Rolling shutters shall be 60 minutes rated and 

shall be closed automatically upon receiving 
fire signal. 

v.  Where sandwich panels are used for wall sys-
tems, it shall comply with Section 4.9. of this 
chapter. 

vi. Steel structure fire rating shall not be required. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Figure 1.6: Separation of multitenant warehouses with sprinklers 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 83 of 1348 

 

Table 1.9: Fire Resistance Separation and other requirement of incidental accessory /Occupancies. 

REQUIRED  
INCIDENTAL  
SEPARATION 
ACCESSORY 
WITH  
ROOMS AND                        
AUTOMATIC 
OCCUPANCIES 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

REQUIRED 
SEPARATION 
WITHOUT  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

OTHER  CONSTRUCTION AND PROTECTION 
REQUIREMENTS 
 
(See  
Chapter 9 for Fire Protection requirements 
Chapter 10 for smoke control requirements) 

32. OIL TANK 

1 Hour 

2 Hour 

i.  Separation and Compartmentation shall be com-

ROOM 

plete with walls, floor and opening protection. 

ii.  Fire door shall be 60 minutes fire rated for 1 hour 

rated wall and 90 minutes for 2 hour rated wall. 

33.  FUEL                               
1 Hour 

1 Hour 

i.  The separation is between retail/restaurants/

DISPENSING 
UNITS/    
PETROL   
STATIONS/ 
GAS         
STATIONS             

department/workshops and storage occupancies.  

ii.  Front side of these occupancies need not be fire 

resistance rated but shall be minimum of 3 m away 
from the fuel dispensing unit. 

iii. The Height of canopies shall not be less than 4115 

mm. 

iv. Canopies, supports, shades, structure used for the 

petrol station fuel dispensing and other occupan-
cies in the vicinity shall be 1 hour fire rated.  See 
Section 7 for material test standards. 

v.  Cladding and exterior façade shall comply with   

Section 4, Section 5 and Section 6 of this chapter. 
vi. Provisions shall be made to prevent spilled liquids 
from flowing into adjacent buildings, such as grad-
ing driveways, raising door sills, drainage etc. 

vii.Motor vehicle traffic patterns at motor fuel dispens-
ing facilities shall be designed to inhibit movement 
of vehicles that are not being fueled from passing 
through the dispensing area. 

viii.See Chapter 13, Section 3. Motor Fuel Dispensing 

Facilities for further requirements. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

PETROL STATION FOR ILLUSTRATION 

Figure 1.6.a: Separation of Fuel dispensing stations/Petrol stations 

 

 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 84 of 1348 

 

Table 1.9: Fire Resistance Separation and other requirement of incidental accessory /Occupancies. 

INCIDENTAL  
ACCESSORY ROOMS 
AND OCCUPANCIES 

REQUIRED  
SEPARATION 
WITH  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

REQUIRED 
SEPARATION 
WITHOUT  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

OTHER  CONSTRUCTION AND PROTECTION 
REQUIREMENTS 
 
(See  
Chapter 9 for Fire Protection requirements 
Chapter 10 for smoke control requirements) 

34. OPEN PARKING 
 
 

1 Hour 

2 Hour 

i.  Each parking level shall have permanent wall 

openings open to the atmosphere, for an area 
of not less than 0.4 m2 for each linear meter of 
its two opposite exterior perimeter. 

ii.  Such openings shall be distributed over 40 per-

cent of the building perimeter surfaces, uni-
formly over each of at least two opposing side 
surfaces. 

iii. Interior wall lines and column lines shall be at 

least 20% open. 

iv. Any part of the carpark shall be within 30 m of 
the permanent natural ventilation opening on 
the perimeter surface. 

v.  See Chapter 10. Section 3.5., for further open 
parking categorization for smoke management 
system purposes. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 1.7: Open parking for illustration 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 85 of 1348 

Table 1.9: Fire Resistance Separation and other requirement of incidental accessory /Occupancies. 

INCIDENTAL  
ACCESSORY 
ROOMS AND     OC-
CUPANCIES 

35. PASSENGER 
ELEVATOR  
LOBBY 

REQUIRED  
SEPARATION 
WITH  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

REQUIRED 
SEPARATION 
WITHOUT  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

1 Hour 

1 Hour 

OTHER  CONSTRUCTION AND PROTECTION 
REQUIREMENTS 
 
(See  
Chapter 9 for Fire Protection requirements 
Chapter 10 for smoke control requirements) 

i.  Barriers forming the elevator lobby shall have a 
minimum 1-hour fire resistance rating and shall 
be arranged as a smoke barrier. 

ii.  Elevator lobby door assemblies shall have a mini-

mum 1-hour fire protection rating 

iii. Elevator lobby door leaves shall be self-closing or 

automatic-closing. 

iv. Each elevator landing and lobby shall have access 

to at least one exit. 

v.  Every Superhighrise building , i.e., building with 

height more than 90 m from fire access level, 
shall have elevator lobby doors. Elevators shall 
not be open to exit corridors without lobby barri-
ers in Superhighrise buildings. 

36. ELEVATOR 

SHAFT/
HOISTWAY  

       
      (Elevator Shaft 

1/2/3 Hour 
depending 
on the build-
ing construc-
tion type 

1/2/3 Hour 
depending 
on the build-
ing construc-
tion type 

i.  Elevator shaft Separation requirement is exempt-
ed when elevator is on external face of façade or 
located in open spaces like atriums, communi-
cating space or convenience space. 

ii.  Not more than 4 elevator cars shall be located in 

fire ratings 
mentioned 
here are mini-
mum require-
ments and will 
increase based 
on the building 
construction 
type that the 
elevator shaft 
belongs to) 

one single hoistway enclosure. 

iii. Hoistway can be glass and not fire rated but shall 

meet the requirements of ANSI Z97.1, Glazing 
materials used in buildings or CPSC 16 CFR 1201, 
Safety standard  for architectural glazing materi-
als. 

iv. Where an elevator is installed in a blind hoistway 
or on outside of a building, an emergency door in 
the blind portion or blank face of building, in ac-
cordance with  ASME A17.1/CSA B44., Safety 
code of elevators and escalators. 

37. LIFT MACHINE 

ROOM 

Shall be 
same as             
Elevator 
Shaft 

Shall be same 
as Elevator 
Shaft 

i.  Elevator machine rooms serving elevators used 
for occupant evacuation shall be separated by 2 
hours fire resistance separation. 

ii.  Provide ventilation as per Chapter 10 for Smoke 

Control requirements. 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 86 of 1348 

Table 1.9: Fire Resistance Separation and other requirement of incidental accessory /Occupancies. 

 

INCIDENTAL  
ACCESSORY 
ROOMS AND       
OCCUPANCIES 

REQUIRED  
SEPARATION 
WITH  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

REQUIRED 
SEPARATION 
WITHOUT  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

38. FIREMAN’S 

1 Hour 

1 Hour 

LIFT AND       
LOBBY / 

       OCCUPANT  
       EVACUA-
TION LIFT 
AND 

       LOBBY 
       (Also see      

Chapter 3,        
section 3.9) 

 
OTHER  CONSTRUCTION AND PROTECTION 
 
REQUIREMENTS 
 
 
(See  
 
Chapter 9 for Fire Protection requirements 
 
Chapter 10 for smoke control requirements) 
 
 
 

i.  Fireman’s lift shall be protected within a dedicated 
RCC shaft throughout the entire height of the build-
ing. 

ii.  Where fireman’s lift is situated with multiple eleva-

tors in a single RCC shaft, all the elevators in such 
common shaft shall comply to fireman’s lift specifi-
cations. 

 

 

 

 

iii. Fireman’s Lift Lobby shall be provided for all Super-
highrise buildings., i.e., buildings with height more 
than 90 m from fire access level. 

 

iv. Such Fireman’s Lift Lobby shall have direct access to 
an exit stair enclosure. This exit stair enclosure shall 
also have access to the floor corridor without pass-
ing through Fireman’s Lift Lobby. 

 

 

 

v.  Fireman’s Lift Lobby shall be enclosed with smoke 
barrier having 1 hour fire resistance rating with a 
lobby door having 60 minutes fire resistance rating. 
such lobby door shall be self closing or automatic 
closing upon alarm activation. 

 

vi. Fireman’s Lift Lobby shall be sized at not less than    
9 m2 ,  and where used as an occupant evacuation 
lift lobby, at occupant load factor of 0.28 m2 for 50 
people and 1 wheel chair space of 760 mm X 1220 
mm shall be considered. 

vii.Fireman’s Lift car shall have a minimum size and ar-

rangement to accommodate ambulance stretcher of 
610 mm X 2130 mm. 

viii.Class III Fire hose cabinet as per Chapter 9, shall be 

available immediately outside the stair enclosure. 
ix. Fireman’s Lift shall be monitored continuously  at 

Emergency Command Center and by Civil Defence’ 
24X7. 

x.  Where Fireman’s Lift has 2 entrance doors,  second 

entrance shall not be required to open into Fire-
man’s Lift Lobby. 

xi. Fireman’s Lift shall be installed as per ASME A 17.1/

CSA B44. complete with communication and overrid-
ing features. See Figure 1.8.a and Figure1.8.b. for 
various acceptable arrangements of Fireman’s Lift 
Lobby. 

xii. Service rooms having floor or ceiling penetrations 
such as electrical rooms, meter rooms, gas rooms, 
storage rooms, garbage rooms, telephone rooms 
shall not be permitted to open inside the fireman’s 
lift lobby space. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 87 of 1348 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 1.8.a: Fireman‘s Lift Lobby/ Occupant evacuation Lift Lobby 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 88 of 1348 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 1.8.b: Acceptable arrangements of Fireman‘s Lift Lobby 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 89 of 1348 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 1.8.b: Acceptable arrangements of Fireman‘s Lift Lobby 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 90 of 1348 

Table 1.9: Fire Resistance Separation and other requirement of incidental accessory /Occupancies. 

INCIDENTAL  
ACCESSORY ROOMS AND 
OCCUPANCIES 

REQUIRED  
SEPARATION 
WITH  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

REQUIRED 
SEPARATION 
WITHOUT  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

OTHER  CONSTRUCTION AND PROTECTION 
REQUIREMENTS 
 
(See  
Chapter 9 for Fire Protection requirements 
Chapter 10 for smoke control requirements) 

39. COMMUNICATING 

SPACE 

0 Hour 
(Smoke   
Barrier is 
required) 

1 Hour 

i.  Communicating space shall not connect 

more than 3 floors. 

ii.  The lowest or next to lowest floor within 
communicating space shall be a discharge 
street floor. 

iii. Egress capacity of communicating space 

shall be sufficient for all occupants within 
communicating space/levels to egress sim-
ultaneously.   

iv. Each occupant within communicating 

space/level shall have access to at least 
one exit within communicating space from 
each level. 

v.  Occupants outside communicating space 

shall have at least one exit independent of 
communicating space. 

vi. Shall have ordinary hazard content (Group 

B,C) and sprinklered. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Figure 1.9.: Communicating Space 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 91 of 1348 

Table 1.9: Fire Resistance Separation and other requirement of incidental accessory /Occupancies. 

INCIDENTAL  
ACCESSORY ROOMS 
AND OCCUPANCIES 

REQUIRED  
SEPARATION 
WITH  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

REQUIRED 
SEPARATION 
WITHOUT  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

OTHER  CONSTRUCTION AND PROTECTION 
REQUIREMENTS 
 
(See  
Chapter 9 for Fire Protection requirements 
Chapter 10 for smoke control requirements) 

40. CONVENIENCE 

0 Hour 

1 Hour 

i.  Separation is between convenience opening 

OPENINGS 

and protected corridors and fire compart-
ments. 

ii.  Convenience openings shall pierce only one 
floor and not connect more than 2 adjacent 
floors. 

iii. Such openings shall be separated from unpro-
tected vertical openings serving other floors.   

iv. Such openings shall be separated from corri-
dors, other fire compartments or smoke com-
partments on the same floor. 

v.  Such openings shall not serve as required 

means of egress. 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Figure 1.10.: Convenience Opening  

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 92 of 1348 

 

Table 1.9.: Fire Resistance Separation and other requirement of incidental accessory /Occupancies. 

INCIDENTAL  
ACCESSORY ROOMS 
AND OCCUPANCIES 

REQUIRED  
SEPARATION 
WITH  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

REQUIRED 
SEPARATION 
WITHOUT  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

OTHER  CONSTRUCTION AND PROTECTION 
REQUIREMENTS 
 
(See  
Chapter 9 for Fire Protection requirements 
Chapter 10 for smoke control requirements) 

41. CONVENIENCE 

0 Hour 

0 Hour 

i.  Convenience stair shall not be considered as an 

STAIR OPENING 

exit stair. 

ii.  Convenience stair shall not connect more than 

2 floors. 

iii. Convenience stair shall not be permitted in non

-sprinklered buildings. 

iv. The area of the opening shall not exceed twice 
the horizontal projected area of the stairway. 
v.  Such openings shall be separated from unpro-
tected vertical openings serving other floors.   

vi. Such openings shall be separated from corri-
dors, other fire compartments or smoke com-
partments on the same floor. 

i.  Enclosures for Exits and Exit passageways for 
non-highrise buildings and low depth under-
ground buildings shall be 2 hour fire resistance 
rated and shall be 2 hour rated reinforced con-
crete for Highrise buildings and high depth un-
derground buildings. 

ii.  Openings through floors shall be enclosed with 
fire barrier walls/Fire walls, shall be continuous 
from floor to floor or floor to roof. 

iii. Shafts shall be permitted to terminate in a 

room or space having a use related to the pur-
pose of the shaft, provided that the room or 
space is separated from the remainder of the 
building by construction having a fire resistance 
rating and opening protection . 

iv. Shafts that do not extend to the bottom or top 
of the building or structure shall be permitted 
to be protected by approved fire dampers in-
stalled in accordance with their listing at the 
lowest or highest floor level, as applicable, 
within the shaft enclosure. (Subject to Civil De-
fence evaluation and decision) 

 
 
 
 
 

42. VERTICAL              
OPENING              
ENCLOSURES 

2 Hour 

2 Hour 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 93 of 1348 

 

Table 1.9: Fire Resistance Separation and other requirement of incidental accessory /Occupancies. 

INCIDENTAL  
ACCESSORY ROOMS 
AND OCCUPANCIES 

REQUIRED  
SEPARATION 
WITH  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

REQUIRED 
SEPARATION 
WITHOUT  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

OTHER  CONSTRUCTION AND PROTECTION 
REQUIREMENTS 
 
(See  
Chapter 9 for Fire Protection requirements 
Chapter 10 for smoke control requirements) 

43. ESCALATOR/       

0 Hour 

0 Hour 

CONVEYOR 
OPENINGS 

i.  Service openings for Escalators and conveyors, 
where required to be open on more than one 
floor at the same time for purposes of opera-
tion, shall be provided with closing devices . 
ii.  In buildings protected throughout by an ap-

proved automatic sprinkler system, escalators 
or moving walk openings shall be permitted to 
be protected by rolling steel shutters appropri-
ate for the fire resistance rating of the vertical 
opening protected. 

iii. The shutters shall close automatically and inde-
pendently of each other upon smoke detection 
and sprinkler operation at a speed not exceed-
ing 0.15 meters/second. 

iv. Shutters shall be equipped with sensitive lead-

ing edge which shall arrest the progress of a 
moving shutter and cause it to retract a dis-
tance of approximately 150 mm upon the appli-
cation of a force not exceeding 90 N applied to 
the surface of the leading edge. Shutter shall 
have backup power supply. 

v.  In buildings protected throughout by an ap-

proved automatic sprinkler system, escalators 
or moving walk openings shall be permitted to 
be protected in accordance with the sprinkler-
draft curtain method. 

 
 

Figure 1.11.: Draft Curtain and Draft Sprinklers 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 94 of 1348 

 

Table 1.9: Fire Resistance Separation and other requirement of incidental accessory /Occupancies. 

INCIDENTAL  
ACCESSORY ROOMS 
AND OCCUPANCIES 

REQUIRED  
SEPARATION 
WITH  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

REQUIRED 
SEPARATION 
WITHOUT  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

OTHER  CONSTRUCTION AND PROTECTION 
REQUIREMENTS 
 
(See  
Chapter 9 for Fire Protection requirements 
Chapter 10 for smoke control requirements) 

44. ATRIUM 

1 Hour 

1 Hour 

i.  Separation required on each floor, unless sup-

ported by engineering analysis. 

ii.  Glass walls and inoperable windows if any, shall 

be 1 hour fire resistance rated assemblies. 

iii. Where 1 hour fire resistance rating is not met, 

sprinklers shall be provided on both sides of 
such glazing and inoperable windows such that 
sprinklers are located not more than 305 mm 
from glazing and at an interval of 1.8 m to cov-
er the entire surface of the glazing.   

iv. Such sprinklers shall not be required on atrium 
side of the glass or window if there is no walk-
way or other floor area on the atrium side 
above the main floor level. 

v.  Doors in such glass walls shall be self closing or 

activated automatically upon alarm initiation. 
vi. Access to exits or exit discharge within atrium 

shall be allowed if sprinklered. 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 1.12.: Atria  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 95 of 1348 

Table 1.9: Fire Resistance Separation and other requirement of incidental accessory /Occupancies. 

INCIDENTAL  
ACCESSORY ROOMS 
AND OCCUPANCIES 

REQUIRED  
SEPARATION 
WITH  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

REQUIRED 
SEPARATION 
WITHOUT  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

OTHER  CONSTRUCTION AND PROTECTION 
REQUIREMENTS 
 
(See  
Chapter 9 for Fire Protection requirements 
Chapter 10 for smoke control requirements) 

45. MEZZANINE 

0 Hour 

0 Hour 

i.  Mezzanines construction shall be with 1 hour 

fire resistance rating. The aggregate area of 
mezzanines within a room, other than those 
located in special-purpose industrial occupan-
cies, shall not exceed one-third the open area 
of the room in which the mezzanines are locat-
ed. 

ii.  Enclosed space shall not be included in a deter-

mination of the size of the room in which the 
mezzanine is located.   

iii. There shall be no limit on the number of mez-

zanines in a room. 

iv. the area of the mezzanines shall not be includ-

ed in the area of the room . 

v.  All portions of a mezzanine, other than walls 
not more than 1065 mm high, columns, and 
posts, shall be open to an unobstructed exit 
from the room in which the mezzanine is locat-
ed, unless the occupant load of the aggregate 
area of the enclosed space does not exceed 10. 

vi. A mezzanine having two or more means of 

egress shall not be required to open into the 
room in which it is located if not less than one 
of the means of egress provides direct access 
from the enclosed area to an exit at the mezza-
nine level . 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 1.13.: Definition of Mezzanine 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 96 of 1348 

 

Table 1.9.: Fire Resistance Separation and other requirement of incidental accessory /Occupancies. 

INCIDENTAL  
ACCESSORY ROOMS 
AND OCCUPANCIES 

REQUIRED  
SEPARATION 
WITH  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

REQUIRED 
SEPARATION 
WITHOUT  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

OTHER  CONSTRUCTION AND PROTECTION 
REQUIREMENTS 
 
(See  
Chapter 9 for Fire Protection requirements 
Chapter 10 for smoke control requirements) 

46. GARBAGE 

2 Hour 

2 Hour 

i.  Enclosures garbage and linen chutes shall be 2 

CHUTES/ LINEN 
CHUTES 

47. CONCEALED 

0 Hour 

0 Hour 

SPACES 

 
     (Concealed spaces 

generally are 
above false ceil-
ing spaces or be-
low false floor 
spaces, located at 
corridors and cir-
culation areas, 
connecting ser-
vice shafts and 
serve as corridors 
for service instal-
lations such as 
ducts, cables, pip-
ing etc.) 

 

hour fire resistance rated.  

ii.  Openings through floors shall be enclosed with 
fire barrier walls/Fire walls, shall be continuous 
from floor to floor or floor to roof. 

iii. Doors of garbage and linen shafts shall open to 

a room that does not exceed 37 m2, provided 
that the room or space is separated from the 
remainder of the building by construction hav-
ing a fire resistance rating and opening protec-
tion or fully sprinklered. 

i.  Combustible materials shall not be permitted 
within the concealed spaces of buildings classi-
fied as Type I or Type II construction and within 
walls required to be constructed of noncom-
bustible or limited-combustible materials. Tim-
ber/Wood/Plastic shall not be used in con-
cealed spaces. 

ii.  Any concealed space more than 800 mm ac-
commodating services such as non fire rated 
ventilation ducting, exposed cables, wiring and 
fuel gas pipes shall be provided with automatic 
sprinkler system. 

iii. Concealed space shall only be allowed as ple-
num and exempted from sprinkler provision 
when constructed with non-combustible mate-
rial and classified as having Class A flame 
spread index. 

iv. Where i and ii are not met draft stops shall be 

provided such that any concealed space be-
tween ceiling and the floor or roof above shall 
be draftstopped for full depth of the space 
along the line of support for the floor and roof 
structure to form areas not to exceed 93 m2 for 
any space between ceiling and floor and       280 
m2  between ceiling and roof. 

v.  Draft stopping materials shall not be less than 

13 mm gypsum board or other Civil Defence 
approved material. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 97 of 1348 

Table 1.9.: Fire Resistance Separation and other requirement of incidental accessory /Occupancies. 

 

INCIDENTAL  
ACCESSORY 
ROOMS AND 
OCCUPANCIES 

REQUIRED  
SEPARATION 
WITH  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

REQUIRED 
SEPARATION 
WITHOUT  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

48. KIOSKS 

0 Hour 

0 Hour 

49. MEM-

0 Hour 

0 Hour 

BRANE   
STRUC-
TURES 

 
 

 

 
OTHER  CONSTRUCTION AND PROTECTION 
 
REQUIREMENTS 
 
 
(See  
 
Chapter 9 for Fire Protection requirements 
 
Chapter 10 for smoke control requirements) 
 
 
 

i.  Minimum horizontal separation between kiosks and 
other occupancies, including other structures within 
mall circulation area or retail spaces shall not be less 
than 1.5 m. 

 

ii.  The minimum horizontal separation distance be-

 

 

tween 2 adjacent kiosks shall not be less than 6m. 

iii. Kiosks located at sprinkler protected areas and mall 
buildings shall be provided with automatic sprinkler 
system. 

 

iv. Kiosks shall be provided with automatic fire detection 

and alarm system. 

 

v.  Kiosks or group of kiosks shall not have an area more 

 
than 18 m2. . See section 7.1.40. for kiosk material 
requirements. 
 

i.  Membrane structures shall be limited to single storey 

without any height limitation. 

 

ii.  Area shall be limited as per Type II construction re-
quirements, as per Table 1.7. based on the support 
system material. 

 

iii. Membrane structures or materials shall not be used 

where fire resistance rating is required for walls, 
roofs and ceilings. 

iv. Where located on roof, membrane structures, it shall 

not be less than 6 m above roof, terrace or balcony. 
v.  Non-combustible membrane materials shall be used 

where constructed as roofs. 

vi. There shall be a minimum clearance of 1 m between 
the membrane and the contents or equipment within 
the building and between the membrane and any 
exterior object. See section 7.1.41. for material re-
quirements. 

vii.The finished ground level inside and not less than 3 m 

outside of the structure, shall be cleared of all flam-
mable or combustible material and vegetation. 

viii.Air inflated structures shall have not less than two 

weather proof automatic blower units complete with 
automatic control, incapable of over pressurization 
and powered by continuous-rated motors at the max-
imum power required. 

ix. Standby power capable of 4 hour backup shall be pro-

vided for Air inflated membrane structures. 

x.  The design, materials, and construction of the mem-
brane structures shall be based on plans and specifi-
cations prepared by a licensed architect or engineer 
knowledgeable in membrane construction. 

xi. Material loads and strength shall be based on physi-
cal properties of the materials verified and certified 
by an approved testing laboratory.  

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 98 of 1348 

 
 
 

KIOSK FOR ILLUSTRATION 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

INFLATED STRUCTURE FOR ILLUSTRATION 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 99 of 1348 

 

Table 1.9.: Fire Resistance Separation and other requirement of incidental accessory /Occupancies. 

INCIDENTAL  
ACCESSORY ROOMS 
AND OCCUPANCIES 

REQUIRED  
SEPARATION 
WITH  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

REQUIRED 
SEPARATION 
WITHOUT  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

OTHER  CONSTRUCTION AND PROTECTION 
REQUIREMENTS 
 
(See  
Chapter 9 for Fire Protection requirements 
Chapter 10 for smoke control requirements) 

50. TENTS AND       

0 Hour 

0 Hour 

i.  Minimum horizontal separation between Tents 

and other occupancies, including other tents 
shall not be less than 3m. 

ii.  Such separation distance between tents shall 
not be required if tent area is less than 110m2. 

iii. Maximum height shall not exceed 2.8 m. 
iv. The finished ground level enclosed by the 

structure, and the surrounding finished ground 
level not less than 3 m outside of the structure, 
shall be cleared of all flammable or combus-
tible material and vegetation. 

v.  Flammable and combustible storage shall not 

be allowed. 

vi. See section 7.1.42. for material requirements. 

0 Hour 

0 Hour 

i.  Grandstands shall be erected to withstand 

structural loads and only where load carrying 
capacities exist to support loads. manufacturer, 
supplier and designer shall submit undertaking 
letter to Civil Defence stating that design and 
equipment comply to withstand load. 

ii.  Grandstands can be of unlimited area when of 
Type I or Type II construction as per Table 1.7. 

iii. Outdoor Grandstand shall not be erected    

within 3 m of any building which has no 1 hour 
fire resistance rated exterior wall.  

iv. Outdoor grandstands constructed of Type III, 
Type IV or Type V shall not exceed 930 m2 in 
area per unit or 61 m in length. 

v.  Such outdoor grandstand units (iv) shall not be 
located within 6 m apart from each other. And 
not more than 3 units are allowed to be erect-
ed in one group. 

vi. Such groups (v) of less than 3 units shall be sep-
arated by either 2 hour fire rated construction 
extending 610 mm above the seating or shall 
be located 15 m apart. 

vii.Highest level of seat platforms shall not exceed 

6 m from the finished ground level in front of 
the grandstand. 

viii.See Chapter 3 for egress requirements. 

KIOSK FOR ILLUSTRATION 

INFLATED STRUCTURE FOR ILLUSTRATION 

MARQUEES 

51. GRANDSTANDS 
AND BLEACHERS 

 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 100 of 1348 

 

Table 1.9.: Fire Resistance Separation and other requirement of incidental accessory /Occupancies. 

INCIDENTAL  
ACCESSORY ROOMS 
AND OCCUPANCIES 

REQUIRED  
SEPARATION 
WITH  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

REQUIRED 
SEPARATION 
WITHOUT  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

OTHER  CONSTRUCTION AND PROTECTION 
REQUIREMENTS 
 
(See  
Chapter 9 for Fire Protection requirements 
Chapter 10 for smoke control requirements) 

0 Hour 
But shall be   
capable of  
resisting 
smoke 

52. PEDESTRIAN 

WALKWAYS,   
PEDESTRIAN 
ROAD CROSSING 
BRIDGES,            
PEDESTRIAN 
BRIDGE 
(ENCLOSED OR 
UNENCLOSED) 
CONNECTING 
TWO BUILDINGS 
OR STRUCTURES . 

2 Hour 

i.  The separation requirement is between pedes-

trian walkway or bridge and the interior of 
buildings that such bridge or walkway con-
nects, if any. Such separation fire resistance 
rating on the buildings or structures shall ex-
tend 3 m all around the walkway or bridge con-
necting the buildings. Any openings in such ex-
tended 3 m fire rating shall have 45 min fire 
resistance rating or equipment and devices to 
ensure the protection. (louvered Windows, 
Doors, curtains etc.). 

ii.  Separation fire rating is not required if the 

buildings that the bridge connects are more 
than 3 m away AND sprinkler protected, or the 
building is open parking. Fire rating is not re-
quired where both sidewalls of the walkway or 
bridge are 50% open uniformly throughout.  

iii. Walkway or bridge shall be constructed of non-
combustible or limited-combustible materials. 
Flammable panels and Plastic shall not be used 
in constructing walkways and bridges. 

iv. Fire retardant wood shall be permitted for roof 

construction. 

v.  Minimum clear height of interior of the pedes-
trian walkway or bridge shall not be less than 
2.13 m. 

vi. Minimum clear height of the pedestrian walk-

way or bridge above the Fire Access road grade 
shall not be less than 4.5 m. 

vii.Interiors, Exterior claddings, façade material 

shall comply with Section 7 of this chapter. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

KIOSK 

PEDESTRIAN BRIDGE FOR ILLUSTRATION 

INFLATED STRUCTURE 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 101 of 1348 

 

Table 1.9.: Fire Resistance Separation and other requirement of incidental accessory /Occupancies. 

INCIDENTAL  
ACCESSORY ROOMS 
AND OCCUPANCIES 

REQUIRED  
SEPARATION 
WITH  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

REQUIRED 
SEPARATION 
WITHOUT  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

OTHER  CONSTRUCTION AND PROTECTION 
REQUIREMENTS 
 
(See  
Chapter 9 for Fire Protection requirements 
Chapter 10 for smoke control requirements) 

53. AIRPORT          

0 Hour 

0 Hour 

TERMINAL  
BUILDINGS. 

i.  Construction Types shall be limited to Type I, 
Type II or Type IV. (With tested and approved 
Non combustible or limited combustible mate-
rials) 

ii.  Interior finish shall be Class A. (See Section 7). 
iii. The aircraft loading walkway exterior surfaces 

of floor, roof, walls, and load-bearing structural 
members shall be constructed entirely of mate-
rials or composite assemblies that maintain the 
structural integrity and heat transfer character-
istics needed to meet the requirements of 
egress period of 5 minutes under free burning 
jet fuel spill fire.  

iv. Construction, Fuel Safety, Fire protection, Ven-
tilation shall comply with NFPA 415, standard 
on Airport Terminal Buildings, Fuel Ramp Drain-
age and Loading walkways. 

54. AIR TRAFFIC  

0 Hour 

0 Hour 

i.  Airport Traffic Control Towers shall be con-

CONTROL TOWER 
HAVING FLOOR 
AREA NOT MORE 
THAN 140 M2
 

structed as follows with heights measured from 
grade plane to the cab floor.                                              
a. Type I with unlimited Height                            
b. Type II (222) up to 73 m Height                       
c. Type II (111) up to 30 m Height 

ii.  The levels located below the observation level 
shall be permitted only for electrical, communi-
cations, electronic and mechanical equipment 
rooms, rest and small office area for employ-
ees. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

AIRPORT TRAFFIC CONTROL TOWER FOR ILLUSTRATION 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 102 of 1348 

 

Table 1.9.: Fire Resistance Separation and other requirement of incidental accessory /Occupancies. 

INCIDENTAL  
ACCESSORY ROOMS 
AND OCCUPANCIES 

REQUIRED  
SEPARATION 
WITH  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

REQUIRED 
SEPARATION 
WITHOUT  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

OTHER  CONSTRUCTION AND PROTECTION 
REQUIREMENTS 
 
(See  
Chapter 9 for Fire Protection requirements 
Chapter 10 for smoke control requirements) 

55. AIRCRAFT           

1 Hour 

1 Hour 

i.  Fire resistance separation are from aircraft 

HANGER 

 

hangers and adjoining occupancies, other than 
service and equipment rooms. 

ii.  Equipment, Service rooms shall be separated 

from hangers by 2 hour fire rated construction. 

iii. All main steel columns shall be coated to 

achieve fire resistance rating of 2 hours. Such 
fire coating material shall resist the effects of 
Foam or other fire suppressing agents. 

iv. Roofing shall be Class A or Class B. See section 

7 for approved roof coverings. 

v.  Minimum of 15 m clear space shall be main-
tained around the aircraft hanger. Such clear 
space shall not be used for parking of aircraft or 
storage. 

vi. Exterior walls located less than 9 m from plot 

lines shall be of 2 hour fire resistance rated. 

vii.Group I Aircraft Hanger (Where aircraft access 
door height exceeds 8.5 m OR single fire area, 
compartment exceeds 3716 m2 ) shall be of 
Type I OR Type II (222) construction. 

viii.Group II Aircraft Hanger (Where aircraft access 

door height is 8.5 m or less AND single fire ar-
ea, compartment is less than 3716 m2 ) shall be 
of Type I for  2787 m2 -3716 m2  Fire area,         
of Type II (222) for  1858 m2 -3716 m2  Fire area, 
of Type II (111) for  1394 m2 -3716 m2  Fire area. 
ix. Group III Aircraft Hanger (Where aircraft access 

door height is 8.5 m or less, are restricted to 
single storey only) AND single maximum fire 
area, compartment allowed shall be                 
2787 m2  for Type I construction ,                  
1858 m2  for Type II (222) construction,                        
1394 m2  for Type II (111) construction,                  
1115 m2  for Type II (000) construction.                    
x.  Group IV Aircraft hangers (Where construction 
is of membrane covered steel structure) , shall 
be limited to single storey and membrane shall 
be tested and listed. See Section 7. 

xi. Construction, cluster of hangers, Flooring, 

Roofing, Fuel Safety, Lightening/Fire protec-
tion, Ventilation shall comply with NFPA 409,  
Aircraft Hangers. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 103 of 1348 

 

Table 1.9.: Fire Resistance Separation and other requirement of incidental accessory /Occupancies. 

INCIDENTAL  
ACCESSORY ROOMS 
AND OCCUPANCIES 

REQUIRED  
SEPARATION 
WITH  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

REQUIRED 
SEPARATION 
WITHOUT  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

OTHER  CONSTRUCTION AND PROTECTION 
REQUIREMENTS 
 
(See  
Chapter 9 for Fire Protection requirements 
Chapter 10 for smoke control requirements) 

56. SIGNBOARDS 

0 Hour 

0 Hour 

i.  Flammable, Combustible, Plastic, Foam materi-

AND BILLBOARDS 
ON BUILDING 
ENVELOPE 

als shall not be used in erecting signboards. 

ii.  Signboards erected on building envelope shall 
not reduce or compromise the fire resistance 
rating of the building façade system or building 
envelope.  

iii. All the electrical wiring, connections, luminaries 
and lamps shall be installed in accordance with 
relevant requirements of NFPA 70 and Electrici-
ty Authority safety regulations. 

iv. All the combustible materials used for sign-
boards shall comply with fire tests as per      
Section 7.1.44. 

57. INTERIOR SIGNS 

0 Hour 

0 Hour 

i.  Interior Signboards and Billboards shall not ex-

AND BILLBOARDS 

58. MODULAR   
HOUSES/      
MANUFACTURED 
HOUSES AND  
OFFICES 

 

ceed 10% of the wall they are installed on. 

ii.  Flammable, Combustible, Plastic, Foam materi-

als shall not be used in erecting signboards. 

iii. Interior signboards and billboards shall satisfy 

either Class A or Class B, in their reaction to fire 
tests. 

0 Hour 

0 Hour 

i.  Construction, Structure, Planning, Materials 

etc. shall be as per NFPA 501. Standard on 
Manufactured housing. See Material Test Re-
quirements in Section 7.1.46. 

ii.  The interior finish of walls, columns, and parti-

tions shall not have a flame-spread index ex-
ceeding 200. 

iii. Ceiling interior finish shall not have a flame-

spread index exceeding 75. 

iv. Walls adjacent to or enclosing a furnace or wa-

ter heater, and the ceilings above them, shall 
have an interior finish with a flame-spread in-
dex not exceeding 25. 

v.  Thermal insulation shall have flame spread of 

not more than 25. See Section 7.1.11. 

vi. Materials used to surface the cooking and 

heating areas shall be limited-combustible ma-
terials *e.g.,  in. (8 mm) gypsum board+. 

vii.Cooking shall not be allowed inside the unit in 

group modular housing or office set up as in 
construction site. Cooking shall be arranged in 
a separate unit dedicated for cooking. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 104 of 1348 

Table 1.9.: Fire Resistance Separation and other requirement of incidental accessory /Occupancies. 

INCIDENTAL  
ACCESSORY 
ROOMS AND 
OCCUPANCIES 

59. RAIL AND 
TRAM       
SYSTEMS 

REQUIRED  
SEPARATION 
WITH  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

REQUIRED 
SEPARATION 
WITHOUT  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

2 Hour 

2 Hour 

OTHER  CONSTRUCTION AND PROTECTION 
REQUIREMENTS 
 
(See  
Chapter 9 for Fire Protection requirements 
Chapter 10 for smoke control requirements) 

i.  Planning, Construction, Structure, Strength, Materi-
als etc. shall be as per NFPA 130. Standard for Fixed 
Guideway Transit and Passenger Rail Systems and 
latest edition of UAE Fire and Life Safety Code of 
Practice. 

ii.  Building construction for all new stations shall be 

not less than Type I– or Type II– or combinations of 
Type I– and Type II–approved noncombustible con-
struction as per the height and area calculations of 
latest edition of UAE Fire and Life Safety Code of 
Practice.  

iii. Stairs and escalators regularly used by passengers 

shall not be required to be enclosed. 

iv. Ancillary buildings shall be separated from station.  
All power substations shall have a fire separation of 
at least 3 hours from all other occupancies. 

v.  Electrical control rooms, auxiliary electrical rooms, 
and associated battery rooms shall have a fire sepa-
ration of at least 2 hours from all other occupancies 
and spaces. 

vi. Trash rooms shall have a fire separation of at least 1 

hour from all other occupancies and sprinkler pro-
tected. 

vii.Train control rooms and associated battery rooms 
shall have a fire separation of at least 2 hours from 
all other occupancies. Battery rooms shall be me-
chanically ventilated as per NFPA 1 requirements. 

viii.All public areas shall have a fire separation of at 

least 2 hours from nonpublic areas. 

ix. All station public areas shall have a fire separation of 

at least 2 hours from all no-transit occupancies, ex-
cept where degree of hazard permits reduction in 
rating, such as suppression systems or open station 
configuration.  

x.  Interior wall and ceiling finish materials, other than 

textile wall coverings or foam plastic insulation, shall 
exhibit a flame spread index not exceeding 25 and a 
smoke developed index not exceeding 450, when 
tested by NFPA 255 or by ASTM E 84 or UL 723. and 
shall comply with latest edition of UAE Fire and Life 
Safety Code of Practice.  

xi. Perimeter Fire Barriers, Exterior Curtain Wall and 
Cladding systems shall be ‘Civil Defence Approved 
System’., 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 105 of 1348 

Table 1.9.: Fire Resistance Separation and other requirement of incidental accessory /Occupancies. 

INCIDENTAL  
ACCESSORY 
ROOMS AND       
OCCUPANCIES 

REQUIRED  
SEPARATION 
WITH  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

REQUIRED 
SEPARATION 
WITHOUT  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

OTHER  CONSTRUCTION AND PROTECTION 
REQUIREMENTS 
 
(See  
Chapter 9 for Fire Protection requirements 
Chapter 10 for smoke control requirements) 

60. ROAD TUNNELS  0 Hour 

0 Hour 

i.  Construction, Structure, Strength, Materials etc. 
shall be as per NFPA 502. Standard for Road Tun-
nels, Bridges and Other Limited Access High-
ways. 

ii.  The emergency exits shall be enclosed in a mini-
mum 2-hour fire-rated enclosure having a Class 
A interior finish  

2 Hour 

2 Hour 

i.  Construction, Structure, Strength, Materials etc. 

shall be as per NFPA 88A. Standard for Parking 
structure. 

ii.  Those parts of parking structures located within, 

immediately below, attached to, or less than 
3000 mm from a building used for any other pur-
pose shall be separated by walls, partitions, 
floors, or floor–ceiling assemblies having fire re-
sistance ratings of not less than 2 hours. 

iii. Offices or other similar spaces that are related to 

the operation of the parking structure and are 
less than 300 m2 in area, other than cashier or 
attendant booths, shall be separated from park-
ing areas by walls or partitions that resist the 
passage of smoke. 

iv. Perimeter Fire Barriers, Exterior Curtain Wall and 

Cladding systems shall be ‘Civil Defence Ap-
proved System’. 

i.  Where required and permitted by Civil Defence, 
Helipads and rooftop heliports and rooftop land-
ing pads shall be constructed in accordance with 
NFPA 418, Standard for Heliports.  

ii.  Fueling systems associated with rooftop heli-
ports shall be constructed in accordance with 
NFPA 407, Standard for Aircraft Fuel Servicing. 
iii. For fire fighting and protection requirements, 

refer to Chapter 9. Table 9.29.14. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

61. ROBOTIC/           
MECHANICAL   
PARKING    
STRUCTURE 

62. HELIPADS/  

 

 

ROOFTOP       
HELIPADS 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 106 of 1348 

Table 1.9.: Fire Resistance Separation and other requirement of incidental accessory /Occupancies. 

 

INCIDENTAL  
ACCESSORY 
ROOMS AND       
OCCUPANCIES 

REQUIRED  
SEPARATION 
WITH  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

REQUIRED 
SEPARATION 
WITHOUT  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

63. ROOFTOP      
STRUCTURES 

 

 

OTHER  CONSTRUCTION AND PROTECTION 
REQUIREMENTS 
 
(See  
Chapter 9 for Fire Protection requirements 
Chapter 10 for smoke control requirements) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

i.  Roof structures on buildings of Type I or Type II 
construction shall be not more than 8535 mm in 
height above the roof of the building. 

ii.  In buildings of Type III, Type IV, or Type V con-

struction, roof structures shall be not more than 
6100 mm above the roof of the building. 

 

iii. The aggregate area of roof structures shall be 

 

not more than 33 percent of the area of the roof 
of the building. 

 

 

iv. Roof structures shall be consistent with the re-
quired type of construction of the building and 
shall comply with the fire resistance rating of 
exterior walls, based on the horizontal separa-
tion of the wall, in accordance with Table 1.3. of 
this Chapter. 

 

v.  Except for the following materials all other 

roofing compositions shall meet the require-
ments of Section 6 and Table 1.22. 

 

 
a. Brick or masonry 
b. Clay or concrete roof tile 
c. Exposed concrete roof deck 
d. Copper or ferrous sheets or shingles 
e. Slate 
f. Minimum of 19.5 kg/m2
 of gravel or slag embed-
ded in a flood coat of asphalt or coal tar over built-
up roofing (BUR) installed at maximum slope of 13 
mm/305 mm 
g. Ballasted sheet membrane roofing system  
h. Concrete paver blocks used as ballast. 
 

i.      In occupancies other than mercantile, mall, 
industrial, or storage occupancies with ordi-
nary or high hazard contents, or other occu-
pancies with high hazard contents exceeding 
the maximum allowable quantities per control 
area as required by Chapter 13, the fire-
resistive protection of the roof-ceiling assem-
bly required by Table 1.6. shall not be required 
where every part of the roof-ceiling assembly 
is 6100 mm or more above any floor immedi-
ately below. 

64. ROOF-CEILING 

 

 

ABOVE ANY 
FLOOR 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 107 of 1348 

Table 1.9.: Fire Resistance Separation and other requirement of incidental accessory /Occupancies. 

INCIDENTAL  
ACCESSORY 
ROOMS AND       
OCCUPANCIES 

REQUIRED  
SEPARATION 
WITH  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

REQUIRED 
SEPARATION 
WITHOUT  
AUTOMATIC 
FIXED FIRE  
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM 

OTHER  CONSTRUCTION AND PROTECTION 
REQUIREMENTS 
 
(See  
Chapter 9 for Fire Protection requirements 
Chapter 10 for smoke control requirements) 

65. ELECTRICAL 

1 Hour 

1 Hour 

i.  Separation and Compartmentation shall be com-

ROOM  

 
 

plete with walls, floor and opening protection 
with approved fire stopping system. 

ii.  Fire door shall be 60 minutes fire rated. 

66. TELEPHONE 

1 Hour 

1 Hour 

i.  Separation and Compartmentation shall be com-

ROOM 

 
 

plete with walls, floor and opening protection 
with approved fire stopping system. 

ii.  Fire door shall be 60 minutes fire rated. 

67. ETS ROOM 

0 Hour 

0 Hour 

68. GSM ROOM 

0 Hour 

0 Hour 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 108 of 1348 

2.12.  Minimum Fire resistance ratings for opening protections  

2.12.1.  Opening protective in Fire resistance rated assemblies in various building components 

shall be as per Table 1.10. See Section 7 for material tests requirements. 

Table 1.10: Fire Resistance rating for opening protectives (Doors, Windows, Shutters etc.)  

BUILDING  
COMPONENTS AND 
TYPE OF FIRE RATED 
ASSEMBLY 

REQUIRED 
FIRE  
RATING OF 
THE  WALL / 
PARTITION 
ASSEMBLY 

MINIMUM  FIRE  
RATING OF 
FIRE DOOR / 
FIRE  
SHUTTER 
ASSEMBLY 

DOOR  
VISION  
PANEL / 
WIRED GLASS 
MAXIMUM SIZE 

MINIMUM  
FIRE  
RATING OF 
FIRE  
WINDOW 
ASSEMBLY 

MINIMUM   
SIDE LIGHT/ 
TRANSOM   
ASSEMBLY 
RATING 

1. EXTERIOR WALLS 

 

 

 

 

 

4 Hour 

3 Hour 

2 Hour 

1 Hour 

 

3 Hour 

3 Hour 

 

 

 

As per test 

3 Hour 

As per test 

3 Hour 

3 Hour  

3 Hour  

90 Minutes 

As per test 

90 Minutes 

120 Minutes 

60 Minutes 

0.065 m2 

45 Minutes 

45 Minutes 

2. INETERIOR WALLS 

 

 

 

 

 

2.1. Fire Walls and 

4 Hour 

3 Hour 

Not allowed 

Not allowed  3 Hour 

Fire Barriers 

 

 

 

 

3 Hour 

2 Hour 

1 Hour 

3 Hour 

Not allowed 

Not allowed  3 Hour 

90 Minutes 

Not allowed 

Not allowed  120 Minutes 

60 Minutes 

As per test 

45 Minutes 

45 Minutes 

30 Minutes 

20 Minutes 

As per test 

20 Minutes 

20 Minutes 

2.2. Exit Corridor 

 

2.3. Elevator  
        Hoistways 

 

 

2 Hour 

1 Hour 

3 Hour 
 

2 Hour 

1 Hour 

90 Minutes 

As per test 

120 Minutes  120 Minutes 

60 Minutes 

As per test 

45 Minutes 

45 Minutes 

90 Minutes 

0.1 m2 

Not allowed  120 Minutes 

90 Minutes 

60 Minutes 

0.1 m2 

0.1 m2 

Not allowed  120 Minutes 

60 Minutes 

60 Minutes 

2.4. Elevator Lobby 

1 Hour 

60 Minutes 

0.065 m2 

60 Minutes 

60 Minutes 

2.5. Vertical Shafts 
(Stairs, Shafts, 
Chutes) 

 

2 Hour 
When >4 floors 

1 Hour  
When <4 floors 

90 Minutes 

As per test 

Not allowed  120 Minutes 

60 Minutes 

As per test 

60 Minutes 

60 Minutes 

2.6. Horizontal Exit 

2 Hour 

90 Minutes 

As per test 

120 Minutes  120 Minutes 

2.7. Smoke Barrier 

1 Hour 

20 Minutes 

As per test 

45 Minutes 

45 Minutes 

2.8. Smoke Partition 

30 Minutes 

20 Minutes 

As per test 

20 Minutes 

20 Minutes 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 109 of 13482.13.  Minimum Fire resistance ratings for Exit corridors based on 

Occupancies 

2.13.1.  Fire rating of Exit Corridors, Exit access corridors and internal partitions for various 

occupancies shall be as per Table 1.11.a.,  

Table 1.11.a.: Fire Resistance rating of Exit Corridors and Exit Access Corridors  

OCCUPANCY 

EXIT ACCES 
CORRIDOR 
WITH SPRINKLER 

EXIT ACCESS 
CORRIDOR 
WITHOUT 
SPRINKLER 

1. ASSEMBLY 

2. BUSINESS 

0 Hour 

0 Hour 

3. EDUCATIONAL 

0 Hour 

4. HEALTHCARE 
   GROUP A 

5. HEALTHCARE 

GROUP B, C 

6. RESIDENTIAL 
    GROUP A, C 

7. RESIDENTIAL 
   GROUP B 

8. PRIVATE  
    VILLAS 

9. HOTEL 

10. DAY CARE 

0 Hour 

0 Hour 

1 Hour 

1 Hour 

1 Hour 

0 Hour 

Not Required  

Not Required  

1 Hour 

1 Hour 

1 Hour 

1 Hour 

1 Hour 

1 Hour 

1 Hour 

1 Hour 

1 Hour 

1 Hour 

1 Hour 

1 Hour 

1 Hour 

1 Hour 

11. DETENTION  
      CORRECTION 

1 Hour 

12. MERCANTILE 

0 Hour 

1 Hour 

0 Hour 

1 Hour 

13. STORAGE 
      GROUP A 

14. STORAGE    
GROUP B, C 

15. INDUSTRIAL  
     GROUP A 

16. INDUSTRIAL  
      GROUP B, C 

0 Hour 

1 Hour 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 110 of 1348 

2.13.2.  Compartmentation and Subdivisions within the same occupancies shall be as per 

Table 1.11.b.,  

Table 1.11.b.: Compartmentation (Sub divisions) within the same occupancy  

OCCUPANCY 

COMPARTMENTATION (SUB DIVISIONS) 
WITH SPRINKLER 

COMPARTMENTATION (SUB DIVISIONS)  
WITHOUT SPRINKLER 

1. ASSEMBLY 
GROUP A, B, C. 

2. BUSINESS 
GROUP A, B, C. 

No requirements 

No requirements 

No requirements 

No requirements 

3. EDUCATIONAL 
GROUP A, B, C. 

No requirements 

i.  1 Hour fire resistance compartment 

shall be provided if area exceeds 
2800 m2 

ii.  1 Hour fire resistance compartment 

shall be provided if length or width of 
building exceeds 91 m. 

iii. 1 Hour fire resistance rated compart-

ment not required if there is direct 
discharge from the areas exceeding 
2800 m2  or the portion exceeding 91 
m in length or width. 

4. HEALTHCARE 
GROUP A 

i.  1 Hour fire resistance rated smoke 
barrier shall be provided for every 
hospital floor to achieve minimum of 
2 smoke compartments, not exceed-
ing 2100 m2 in area. 

ii.  1 Hour fire resistance rated smoke 
barrier shall be provided for every 
hospital floor having occupant load 
of more than 50 persons to achieve 
minimum of 2 smoke compartments, 
not exceeding 2100 m2 in area. 

iv. 1 Hour fire resistance rated smoke 
barrier shall be provided for every 
hospital floor to achieve minimum of 
2 smoke compartments, not exceed-
ing 2100 m2 in area. 

v.  1 Hour fire resistance rated smoke 
barrier shall be provided for every 
hospital floor having occupant load of 
more than 50 persons to achieve min-
imum of 2 smoke compartments, not 
exceeding 2100 m2 in area. 

iii. The travel distance in such smoke 

vi. The travel distance in such smoke 

compartments, to reach an exit door, 
shall not exceed   61 m. 

compartments, to reach an exit door, 
shall not exceed 61 m. 

5. HEALTHCARE 
GROUP C 

i.  1 Hour fire resistance rated smoke 
barrier corridor shall be provided. 

ii.  1 Hour fire resistance rated smoke 
barrier corridor shall be provided. 
iii. 1 Hour fire resistance rated smoke 
barrier shall be provided for every 
floor exceeding 929 m2 and/or ex-
ceeding 465 m2 in area to achieve 
minimum of 2 smoke compartments. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 111 of 1348 

 

Table 1.11.b.: Compartmentation (Sub divisions) within the same occupancy  

OCCUPANCY 

COMPARTMENTATION (SUB DIVISIONS) 
WITH SPRINKLER 

COMPARTMENTATION (SUB DIVISIONS)  
WITHOUT SPRINKLER 

i.  1 Hour fire resistance rated walls 

and floors separation shall be provid-
ed for each Flat/Dwelling unit/
Sleeping room from other Flat/
Dwelling unit/Sleeping room. 

ii.  1 Hour fire resistance rated walls and 
floors separation shall be provided for 
each Flat/Dwelling unit/Sleeping 
room from other Flat/Dwelling unit/
Sleeping room. 

i.  1 Hour fire resistance rated walls 

and floors separation shall be provid-
ed for each Dormitory/Dwelling 
unit/Sleeping room from other Dor-
mitory/Dwelling unit/Sleeping room. 

ii.  1 Hour fire resistance rated walls and 
floors separation shall be provided for 
each Dormitory/Dwelling unit/
Sleeping room from other Dormitory/
Dwelling unit/Sleeping room. 

i.  1 Hour fire resistance rated walls 

ii.  2 Hour fire resistance rated walls 

from foundation to roof shall sepa-
rate townhouses (Commercial villas 
with common wall between them). 

from foundation to roof shall sepa-
rate townhouses (Commercial villas 
with common wall between them). 

i.  1 Hour fire resistance rated walls 

and floors separation shall be provid-
ed for each hotel guest room, includ-
ing guest suites, and dormitory room 
from other guest rooms or dormito-
ry rooms. 

ii.  1 Hour fire resistance rated walls and 
floors separation shall be provided for 
each hotel guest room, including 
guest suites, and dormitory room 
from other guest rooms or dormitory 
rooms. 

i.  1 Hour fire resistance rated smoke 
barrier shall be provided for every 
day care center floor located one or 
more floors above discharge level, to 
achieve minimum of 2 smoke com-
partments. 

ii.  1 Hour fire resistance rated smoke 
barrier shall be provided for every 
day care center floor located one or 
more floors above discharge level, to 
achieve minimum of 2 smoke com-
partments 

i.  1 Hour fire resistance rated smoke 
barrier shall be provided for every 
floor to achieve minimum of 2 
smoke compartments. 

iv. 1 Hour fire resistance rated smoke 
barrier shall be provided for every 
floor to achieve minimum of 2 smoke 
compartments. 

ii.  Ii.  Such smoke compartment shall 

v.  Such smoke compartment shall be 

be limited to house occupant load of 
not more than 200 persons. 

limited to house occupant load of not 
more than 200 persons. 

iii. Iii. The travel distance in such smoke 

vi. The travel distance in such smoke 

compartments, to reach an exit 
door, shall not exceed   61 m from 
any point. 

compartments, to reach an exit door, 
shall not exceed   61 m from any 
point. 

6. RESIDENTIAL 
GROUP A, C 

7. RESIDENTIAL 
GROUP B 

8. COMMERCIAL 
VILLAS 

9. HOTEL 
GROUP A, B, C. 

10. DAY CARE 
GROUP A, B. 

11. DETENTION  
CORRECTION 
GROUP A, B, C. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 112 of 1348 

2.13.2.  Compartmentation and Subdivisions in occupancies shall be as per Table 1.11.b.,  

Table 1.11.b.: Compartmentation (Sub divisions) within the same occupancy  

OCCUPANCY 

COMPARTMENTATION (SUB DIVISIONS) 
WITH SPRINKLER 

COMPARTMENTATION (SUB DIVISIONS)  
WITHOUT SPRINKLER 

12. MERCANTILE 
GROUP A, B, C. 

No requirements 

No requirements 

i.  Anchor Units/buildings or bulk mer-
chandising Units more than 1000 m2  
shall be separated from the Mall by 
a fire resistance rated wall of the 
Mall construction type but not less 
than 2 hour fire resistance rated. 

ii.  Each tenant unit including assembly, 

business, mercantile, in the mall 
shall be separated from other tenant 
Unit/space by fire resistance rated 
wall/partition of 1 hour fire re-
sistance rating. (Such separation can 
be up to underside of the ceiling. if 
ceiling is not provided, separation 
shall be up to underside of roof). 

iv. Anchor Units/buildings or bulk mer-
chandising Units more than 1000 m2  
shall be separated from the Mall by a 
fire resistance rated wall of the Mall 
construction type but not less than 2 
hour fire resistance rated. 

v.  Each tenant unit including assembly, 
business, mercantile, in the mall shall 
be separated from other tenant Unit/
space by fire resistance rated wall/
partition of 1 hour fire resistance 
rating. (Such separation can be up to 
underside of the ceiling. if ceiling is 
not provided, separation shall be up 
to underside of roof). 

iii. Parking structure within 18.3 m of 

vi. Parking structure within 18.3 m of 

mall shall be of Type I or Type II con-
struction. 

mall shall be of Type I or Type II con-
struction. 

i.  1 Hour fire resistance rated walls 

from foundation to roof shall sepa-
rate multitenant warehouses as per  
1.9.31.  

i.  1 Hour fire resistance rated walls 

from foundation to roof shall sepa-
rate multitenant warehouses as per  
1.9.31.  

i.  1 Hour fire resistance rated walls 

from foundation to roof shall sepa-
rate multitenant warehouses as per  
1.9.31.  

i.  1 Hour fire resistance rated walls 

from foundation to roof shall sepa-
rate multitenant warehouses as per  
1.9.31.  

ii.  2 Hour fire resistance rated walls from 
foundation to roof shall separate mul-
titenant warehouses as per  1.9.31.  

ii.  2 Hour fire resistance rated walls from 
foundation to roof shall separate mul-
titenant warehouses as per  1.9.31.  

ii.  2 Hour fire resistance rated walls from 
foundation to roof shall separate mul-
titenant warehouses as per  1.9.31.  

i.  2 Hour fire resistance rated walls from 
foundation to roof shall separate mul-
titenant warehouses as per  1.9.31.  

13. MALL 

14. STORAGE 
GROUP A 

15. STORAGE 
GROUP B, C 

16. INDUSTRIAL  
GROUP A 

17. INDUSTRIAL  
GROUP B, C 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 113 of 1348 

 

Table 1.11.b.: Compartmentation (Sub divisions) within the same occupancy  

OCCUPANCY 

COMPARTMENTATION (SUB DIVISIONS) 
WITH SPRINKLER 

COMPARTMENTATION (SUB DIVISIONS)  
WITHOUT SPRINKLER 

18. PARKING 

STRUCTURES 

i.  2 Hour fire resistance rated walls 

i.  2 Hour fire resistance rated walls from 

from foundation to roof shall sepa-
rate parking structures from other 
occupancies except repair shops, 
which shall be separated with 1 Hour 
fire resistance rated wall. 

foundation to roof shall separate 
parking structures from other occu-
pancies except repair shops, which 
shall be separated with 1 Hour fire 
resistance rated wall. 

ii.  Such fire resistance rated wall shall 
not be required when parking struc-
ture is separated from other occu-
pancies by 3 m. 

iii. Parking structures located above or 
below other occupancy, shall have 
construction type as of other occu-
pancy but not less than Type I or 
Type II. 

ii.  Such fire resistance rated wall shall 
not be required when parking struc-
ture is separated from other occupan-
cies by 3 m. 

iii. Parking structures located above or 
below other occupancy, shall have 
construction type as of other occu-
pancy but not less than Type I or Type 
II. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 114 of 1348 

 

2.14.  Interior wall or ceiling finish 

2.14.1.  The tests required for the classifications mentioned in the Table 2.12. shall be as 

per Section 7 of this chapter. 

2.14.2. 

Interior finish of internal walls and partitions for various occupancies shall be as 
per Table 1.12.  

2.14.3.  External Fire retardant coatings to achieve the ratings of Table 1.12. are not ac-
ceptable unless it is existing building. Materials have to achieve the Table 1.12. 
ratings through tests mentioned in Section 7.  

2.14.4. 

 Where an approved automatic sprinkler system is provided, Class C/Class III inte-
rior  wall  and  ceiling  finish  materials  shall  be  permitted  in  any  location  where 
Class  B/  Class  II  is  required,  and  Class  B/  Class  II  interior  wall  and  ceiling  finish 
materials shall be permitted in any location where Class A/ Class I is required. 

Table 1.12: Interior finish of internal walls and partitions. 

OCCUPANCY 

EXITS 

CORRIDORS  OTHER  
SPACES 

CEILINGS 

FLOORING 

1. ASSEMBLY 
    EDUCATION 
   HEALTHCARE 
   RESIDENTIAL 
   HOTEL 
   DAY CARE 

2. BUSINESS 
    DETENTION 
    MERCANTILE 

3. PRIVATE       

VIL LA 

   COMMERCIAL 

VILLA 

4. INDUSTRIAL 
    STORAGE 

Class A 
Class 1 
Class 2 
Class I 

Class A 
Class B 
Class 1 
Class 2 
Class I 
Class II 

Class A  
Class B 
Class C 
Class 1 
Class 2 
Class I  
Class II 
Class III 

Class A  
Class B 
Class 1 
Class 2 
Class I  
Class II 

Class A  
Class B 
Class 1 
Class 2 
Class I  
Class II 

Class A  
Class B 
Class 1 
Class 2 
Class I  
Class II 

Class A  
Class B 
Class C 
Class 1 
Class 2 
Class I  
Class II 
Class III 

Class A  
Class B 
Class C 
Class 1 
Class 2 
Class I  
Class II 
Class III 

Class A  
Class B 
Class 1 
Class 2 
Class I  
Class II 

Class A  
Class B 
Class C 
Class 1 
Class 2 
Class I  
Class II 
Class III 

Class A  
Class B 
Class C 
Class 1 
Class 2 
Class I  
Class II 
Class III 

Class A  
Class B 
Class C 
Class 1 
Class 2 
Class I  
Class II 
Class III 

Class A  
Class B 
Class 1 
Class 2 
Class I  
Class II 

Class A  
Class B 
Class 1 
Class 2 
Class I  
Class II 

Class A  
Class B 
Class C 
Class 1 
Class 2 
Class I  
Class II 
Class III 

Class A  
Class B 
Class C 
Class 1 
Class 2 
Class I  
Class II 
Class III 

Class I  
Class II 

Class I  
Class II 

Class I  
Class II 

Class I  
Class II 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 115 of 13482.15.  Ducts and Air-Transfer Openings 

2.15.1.  Fire Damper Requirements 

2.15.1.1.  Fire dampers shall be installed to protect ducts and air-transfer open-

ings that penetrate fire barriers and fire walls. 

2.15.1.2.  Fire  dampers  shall  be  designed  and  tested  in  accordance  with          

Section 7, and shall have the minimum fire protection rating specified 
in Table 1.11 for the rating of the assembly penetrated  

Table 1.13: Fire Damper ratings. 

FIRE RESISTANCE RATING OF THE ASSEMBLY 

MINIMUM FIRE DAMPER 
RATING 

3 Hour or greater fire resistance rated assembly 

3 Hour  

Less than 3 Hour fire resistance rated assembly 

90 Minutes 

Ceiling or floor-ceiling or roof-ceiling assemblies 

Same rating as of assem-
blies 

2.15.1.3.  Fire dampers shall be required in the following locations: 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

a.  Ducts and air-transfer openings penetrating walls or partitions having a fire 

resistance rating of 2 or more hours. 

b.  Ducts  and  air-transfer  openings  penetrating  shaft  walls  having  a  fire  re-

sistance rating of 1 or more hours. 

c.  Ducts and air-transfer openings penetrating floors that are required to have 

protected openings where the duct is not protected by a shaft enclosure. 

d.  Air-transfer  openings  that  occur  in  walls  or  partitions  that  are  required  to 

have a fire-resistive rating of 30 minutes or more. 

2.15.1.4.  Please refer to Chapter 10. Table 10.1.8. for further details. 

 

Points to Ponder 

There are two major reasons for the spread of fire in a fully fire resistive con-

struction. 

1.  Fire spread through HVAC ducts. 

2.  Leap frog effect, where fire spreads out exterior from the window of a floor 

and back into window of the next upper level. 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 116 of 1348 

 

2.15.1.5.  Fire dampers shall not be required in the following locations: 

a. 

In floors that do not require protected floor openings. 

b. 

In a duct  system serving only  one  floor and used only  for exhaust  of air to 
the outside and not penetrating a wall or partition having a required fire re-
sistance rating of 2 hours or more or passing entirely through the system and 
contained within its own dedicated shaft. See Figure 1.14. 

c.  Where branch ducts connect to enclosed exhaust risers in which the airflow 
is upward, and steel sub ducts at least 560 mm in length are carried up in-
side the riser at each inlet. 

 
 
 

Figure 1.14.: Penetrations of ventilation ducts for exhaust and supply air  

2.15.2. 

Installation 

2.15.2.1.  Air-conditioning, heating, and ventilating ductwork and related equip-
ment,  including  fire  dampers,  smoke  dampers,  combination  fire  and 
smoke  dampers,  and  ceiling  radiation  dampers,  shall  be  installed  in 
accordance  with  Chapter  10  of  this  Code,  NFPA  90A  or  NFPA  90B, 
Standard for the Installation of Warm Air Heating and Air-Conditioning 
Systems. 

 

 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 117 of 1348 

 

2.15.3.  Access and Identification  

2.15.3.1.  Fire and smoke dampers shall be provided with an approved  means of 

access, as follows: 

a.  The means of access shall be large enough to allow inspection and 

maintenance of the damper and its operating parts. 

b.  The  access  shall  not  affect  the  integrity  of  fire  resistance–rated 

assemblies. 

c.  The  access  openings  shall not  reduce  the fire  resistance  rating of 

the assembly. 

d.  Access points shall be permanently identified. 

e.  Access doors in ducts shall be identified with a label having letters 

not less than 13 mm in height. 

f.  The label shall read as follows in: 

i.    FIRE/SMOKE DAMPER 

ii.   SMOKE DAMPER 

iii.  FIRE DAMPER 

g.  Access doors in ducts shall be tight-fitting and suitable for the re-

quired duct construction. 

2.15.4.  Fire Damper Actuation Device.  

2.15.4.1.  The  operating  temperature  of  the  heat-actuating  device  shall  be  ap-
proximately 27.8°C above the normal temperature within the duct sys-
tem, but not less than 71°C; or it shall be not more than 141°C where 
located in a required smoke control system; or, where a combination 
fire  and  smoke  damper  is  installed,  it  shall  not  exceed  177°C  where 
located in a smoke control system. 

2.16.  Smoke barriers 

2.16.1.  Smoke barriers required by this Code shall be continuous from an outside wall to 
an outside wall, from a floor to a floor, or from a smoke barrier to a smoke barri-
er, or a combination thereof. 

2.16.2.  Smoke barriers required by this Code shall be continuous through all concealed 

spaces, such as those found above a ceiling, including interstitial spaces. 

2.16.3.  A smoke barrier required for an occupied space below an interstitial space shall 
not be required to extend through the interstitial space, provided that the con-
struction  assembly  forming  the  bottom  of  the  interstitial  space  provides  re-
sistance to the passage of smoke equal to that provided by the smoke barrier. 

2.16.4.  Where a smoke barrier is penetrated by a duct or air-transfer opening, a smoke 
damper designed and tested in accordance with the requirements of  Section 7 
shall be installed. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 118 of 1348 

 

 

2.16.5.  Smoke barrier Penetrations 

2.16.5.1.  Penetrations  for  cables,  cable  trays,  conduits,  pipes,  tubes,  vents, 
wires,  and  similar  items  to  accommodate  electrical,  mechanical, 
plumbing, and communications systems that pass through a wall, floor, 
or  floor-ceiling  assembly  constructed  as  a  smoke  barrier,  or  through 
the ceiling membrane of a roof-ceiling of a smoke barrier, shall be pro-
tected by a listed system or a material capable of restricting the trans-
fer of smoke. 

2.16.5.2.  Where a smoke barrier is also constructed as a fire barrier, the pene-
trations shall be protected to limit the spread of fire for a time period 
equal to the fire resistance rating of the assembly, to restrict the trans-
fer of smoke. 

2.16.5.3.  Where  sprinklers  penetrate  a  single  membrane  of  a  fire  resistance-
rated  assembly  in  buildings  equipped  throughout  with  an  approved 
automatic  fire  sprinkler  system,  non-combustible  escutcheon  plates 
shall be permitted, provided that the space around each sprinkler pen-
etration does not exceed ½ in. (13 mm), measured between the edge 
of the membrane and the sprinkler. 

2.16.5.4.  Where the penetration item uses a sleeve to penetrate the smoke bar-
rier,  the  sleeve  shall  be  securely  set  in  the  smoke  barrier,  and  the 
space between the item and the sleeve shall be filled with a listed sys-
tem or a material capable of restricting the transfer of smoke. 

 
2.16.5.5.  Where designs take transmission of vibrations into consideration, any 

vibration isolation shall meet one of the following conditions: 

a. 
b. 

It shall be made on either side of the fire barrier. 
It shall be designed for the specific purpose. 

 

 

 

Figure 1.15.: Penetrations of Barriers 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 119 of 13482.16.6.  Smoke Dampers 

2.16.6.1.  Smoke damper leakage ratings shall be not less than Class II as per UL 
555S or 200 m3/(h.m2)  as per  EN 1366-10.  See  Section  7.  for  test  re-
quirements. 

2.16.6.2.  Elevated temperature ratings shall be not less than 250°F (140°C). 

2.16.6.3.  Smoke dampers shall not be required in the following . 

a.  Where  ducts  or  air-transfer  openings  are  part  of  an  engineered 
smoke  control  system  and  the  smoke  damper  will  interfere  with 
the operation of a smoke control system.  

b.  Where the air in ducts continues to move and the air-handling sys-
tem  installed  is  arranged  to  prevent  recirculation  of  exhaust  or 
return air under fire emergency conditions. 

c.  Where the air inlet or outlet openings in ducts are limited to a sin-

gle smoke compartment 

d.  Where ducts penetrate floors that serve as smoke barriers. 

e.  Where  ducts  penetrate  smoke  barriers  forming  a  communicating 

space separation in fully sprinklered building . 

2.16.7.  Smoke Damper Actuation 

2.16.7.1.  Required  smoke  dampers  in  ducts  penetrating  smoke  barriers  shall 
close  upon  detection  of  smoke  by  means  of  approved  smoke  detec-
tors,  unless  ducts  penetrate  smoke  barriers  above  the  smoke  barrier 
doors and the door release detector actuates the damper. 

2.16.7.2.  Required smoke dampers in air-transfer openings shall close upon de-

tection of smoke by means of approved smoke detectors.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 120 of 13482.17.  Balcony, Windows, Terrace and Balustrades  

2.17.1.  Awareness  

2.17.1.1.  Codes and regulations cannot prevent falls and accidents involving bal-
conies,  windows,  railings  and  terraces.  Therefore,  awareness  of  dan-
gers  caused  by  human  negligence  (Parents  and  Guardians)  is  of  high 
importance,  especially  in  these  times  of  high-rise  living  and  working 
spaces. 

2.17.1.2.  NEVER  LEAVE  children,  special  needs  people,  mentally  challenged, 
mentally  unstable  and  elderly  people  UNATTENDED  and  UNSUPER-
VISED at the balconies, near windows, railings and terraces.  

2.17.1.3.  NEVER  KEEP  furniture,  bedding, 

windows, 

articles  or  climbable  objects 
near 
railings  and  terraces,  which  can 
be  translated  into  ‘LADDER’  by 
innocent and unwary children.  

balconies,      

2.17.1.4.  ALWAYS LOCK  access  to terrac-

railings 

es,  balconies, 
window  panes  when  children, 
special  needs  people,  mentally 
challenged,  mentally  unstable 
and  elderly  people  are 
unattended.  

and     

left    

Did You Know? 

There were 19 Balcony and 
Window related deaths in 
the last 3 years. 
 
The ―Tragic and Curious 
case of balcony deaths in 
UAE‖ are because of pa-
rental and guardian negli-
gence. 

2.17.1.5.  ALCOHOL,  DRUGS  AND  INTOXICATION  can  cause  accidents.  As  an 
Adult, behave safely and responsibly near balconies, windows, terraces 
and railings.  

2.17.2.  Minimum Construction Requirements for Balconies and Railings  

2.17.2.1.  Guards are required for any space, walking 
or  standing  which  is  elevated  760mm 
above the finished grade level.  

2.17.2.2.  From the finished floor level, Height of the 
balcony,  terrace  railings,  elevated  space 
railings 
1200 mm.  

(A),  shall  not  be 

less  than           

2.17.2.3.  Balusters  openings,  the  separation  dis-
tance  between vertical  posts  or members 
(B),  of  balcony,  guardrail or  handrail  shall 
not allow the passage of a 100 mm diame-
ter sphere.  

Figure 1.16.a.: Balcony Railing Specifications 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 121 of 1348 

 

 

 

 

2.17.2.4.  Any opening (B) formed by either vertical posts, curved frames or de-
sign features in the balcony or railings shall not be more than 100 mm.  
See Figure 1.16 a and      Figure 1.16 b. 

2.17.2.5.  Horizontal elements, bars, climbable features shall not be installed up 
to 760 mm. i.e., up to (D).  Where horizontal or climbable elements are 
present in this zone, the 1200 mm height requirement shall start at the 
highest of those climbable elements.  

2.17.2.6.  If the design demands any gap between finished floor surface and the 
bottom  most  horizontal  component  of  the  railing  (E),  such  gap  shall 
not be more than 100mm.  See Figure 1.16 b. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 1.16.b.: Balcony Railing Specifications 

 

 

2.17.2.7. 

The balcony, Handrail, Guard assembly shall be able to withstand a 
single concentrated load of 200 pounds (0.89 kN), applied in any di-
rection at any point.  

2.17.2.8. 

2.17.2.9. 

If the design demands usage of glass panels in the balcony construc-
tion, such glass shall be laminated glass which holds in place if 
shattered and withstand a load of 200 pounds (0.89kN), applied in 
any direction at any point.  See Section 5, Glazing, Safety Glass. 

Balconies and terraces shall not have accesses with self-closing or 
self-latching doors, which can accidentally lock people outside in the 
balcony or terrace, compelling them to misadventures such as climb-
ing, descending or crossing over to other balconies.  

2.17.2.10.  Also see Chapter 3, Table 3.4.11., Guards.  

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 122 of 1348 

 

 

2.17.3.  Minimum Construction Requirements for Windows  

2.17.3.1.  Openable Windows shall open outward from the top.  See Figure 1.17 b. 

Openable windows shall not open from below. 

2.17.3.2.  Sliding and openable Windows shall not be located at (F), a height less than 
865 mm from the finished floor surface level.  If window base is present on 
the finished floor, the height (F) shall be measured from the top of such win-
dow base. See Figure 1.17 a. 

2.17.3.3.  The window pane, if openable, shall not create a gap of more than (G), 100 

mm from the wall, when opened. See Figure 1.17 b. 

2.17.3.4.  The window assembly, shall have reinforced or safety glass and shall be able 
to withstand a single concentrated load of 200 pounds (0.89 kN), applied in 
any direction at any point.  

2.17.3.5.  There should not be any construction features at the bottom of the window 

which can be exploited into ‘ladder or climbing feature’.  

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 1.17a: Window Specifications 

Figure 1.17b: Window Specifications 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2.17.3.6.  See Section 2.17.1.3. Provide 
locks and safety measures for sliding win-
dows.  See Figure 1.17c. 

Figure 1.17c: Window Safety 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 123 of 1348 

 

2.17.4.  Balustrades  

2.17.4.1.  A railing or fencing supported by balusters, especially one forming an 
ornamental parapet or barrier to a balcony, bridge or terrace. Howev-
er, in the context of safety intent of this section, the terms 
“Balustrade”, “Guard”, “Barrier” and “Railing” shall all have the same 
meaning and intent, that being to prevent persons accidentally inter-
acting with the hazard on the other side of the barrier or slipping 
through to a falling hazard. 

2.17.4.2.  Where balcony finishes are flush with the edge of the balcony, an up-
stand feature of a minimum 20 mm height following the same line as 
the balustrade shall be provided to prevent items on the balcony roll-
ing off the edge.  

2.17.5.  Railing, Balustrade and Fence Toppings  

2.17.5.1.  Fence or Railing or Balustrade toppings shall be designed and con-

structed such that they do not constitute a potential danger of injury 
to persons. This includes but not limited to spikes, sharp or barbed 
wire or other jagged or similarly protruding features. 

2.17.6.  Glass used in Railings and Guards  

2.17.6.1.  Glass used as structural balustrade panels in railings shall be construct-

ed of one of the following. 

a. Laminated fully tempered glass with a structural interlayer where 

structural capacity is calculated at 50 Deg Celsius. 

b. Laminated heat-strengthened glass 

2.17.6.2.  Glazing in railing in-fill panels shall meet the requirements of Section 

5.4.2. 

2.17.6.3.  Structural balustrade panels shall meet the following requirements.  

a. The panels and their support system shall be designed to withstand 

the loads specified in ASCE (American Society of Civil Engineers).  

b. A human impact load safety factor of 4 shall be used.  

2.17.6.4.  Each handrail or guard section shall be supported by a minimum of 
three glass balusters, or shall be otherwise supported to remain in 
place if one baluster panel fails, and one of the following criteria shall 
be met.  

a. An attached handrail or guard shall be provided.  

b. The glass balusters shall be laminated glass with two or more glass 

plies of equal thickness and the same glass type, and each of the 
piles of the panels shall be designed to withstand the loads specified 
in ASCE (American Society of Civil Engineers) and any other structur-
al requirements for a top rail.  

2.17.6.5.  Glazing materials shall not be installed in railings in parking garages, 

except for pedestrian areas not exposed to impact from vehicles.  

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 124 of 1348 

2.17.7.  Maintenance of Railings and Guards  

2.17.7.1.  Both Facility management and the occupants are responsible for  

SAFETY of railings and guards.  

2.17.7.2.  Balcony, Terrace and elevated spaces railings and guards shall be in-

spected regularly for damages and warning signs of wear and tear.  See 
Chapter 18. Responsibilities of Stakeholder, Section 2.12. Facility 
Management Responsibilities. 

2.17.7.3.  Some of the warning signs could be corrosion, cracks, bending, loose 
and shaking members of the railings and guards, including nuts, bolts 
and fasteners.  

2.17.7.4.  Any unsafe balcony, terrace or elevated spaces’ railings and guards 

shall be replaced immediately.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 125 of 1348 

3.  Firestop Systems 

 

3.1.  Intention 

3.1.1. 

3.1.2. 

The provision of this section shall specify the minimum requirements for the classi-
fication,  design,  installation,  inspection,  and  maintenance  of  firestop  systems  to 
achieve required fire-resistance-rated construction and compartmentation. 

To  ensure  Firestop  systems  consist  of  a  material, or combination of  materials  in-
stalled to  retain the  integrity of  fire  resistance  rated  construction  by maintaining 
an effective barrier against the spread of flame, smoke and/or hot gases through 
openings (gaps) that accommodate penetrations, fire resistive joints and perimeter 
openings.  

3.1.3. 

To ensure Firestop systems are used in locations including, but not limited to, the 
following as shown in Figure 1.18.a. 

 

 

Figure 1.18.a.: Firestopping Systems at various locations 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 126 of 1348 

 

a. 

b. 

Penetrations through fire resistance rated floor including both empty open-
ings and openings containing penetrants. 

Penetrations  through  fire  resistance  rated  wall  assemblies  including  both 
empty openings and openings containing penetrants. 

c.  Membrane penetrations in fire resistance rated wall assemblies where items 

penetrate one side of the barrier. 

Joints between fire resistance rated assemblies. 

Perimeter gaps between rated floors and an exterior wall assembly. 

d. 

e. 

 

3.2.  Classification of Firestop Systems 

3.2.1. 

Through penetration Firestop system 

a. 

b. 

This category addresses openings in fire rated assemblies where penetrants 
are passing through a fire-rated construction and where the integrity of the 
wall and/or floor needs to be maintained.  

The penetrants include, but are not limited to, mechanical, electrical, piping, 
structural and communication devices.  

Figure 1.18.b.: Through penetration Firestop System 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 127 of 1348 

 

3.2.2.  Membrane-penetration 

a. 

This  category  addresses  openings  in  fire  rated  assemblies  where  only  one 
side of the fire rated barrier is penetrated and where the integrity of the wall 
or floor needs to be maintained. This would include items such as, but not be 
limited to, electrical outlet boxes and other electrical devices. 

b.  Membrane  penetrations  shall  be  permitted  to  be  created  on  both  sides  of 
the wall (or floor) as long as they are protected with a membrane penetra-
tion firestop system or wall opening protective.  

3.2.3. 

Fire resistive joint systems 

a. 

b. 

This category addresses any gap, joint, or opening (whether static or dynam-
ic) between two fire-rated barriers including where the top of a wall meets a 
floor, wall edge to wall edge configurations, floor edge to floor edge configu-
rations, floor edge to wall configurations. 

The maximum movement that a fire resistive joint system is able to accom-
modate, as shown in the design listing, shall be equal to or greater than the 
movement  that is expected or specified for a given joint  in construction or 
design documents. All joints shall be assumed to be dynamic unless specified 
otherwise in construction documents. 

3.2.4. 

Perimeter fire barrier system 

a. 

This category addresses any gap, joint, or opening, whether static or dynam-
ic, between a fire-rated floor assembly and a non-rated exterior wall assem-
bly. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

Figure 1.18.c.: Perimeter Fire Barrier System 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 128 of 1348b. 

The perimeter barrier shall be intended to restrict the interior vertical passage of flame 
and hot gases from one floor to another at the location where the floor intersects the 
inside  of  an  exterior  curtain  wall.    The  perimeter  fire  barrier  shall  remain  securely  in 
place  and  provide  interior  joint  protection  for  the  time  period  no  less  than  the  fire-
resistance rating of the floor assembly. 

c.   Where air gaps and ventilation are intended behind the façade such as in rain screens 
or such designs, the vertical open gap between exterior  façade and building envelope 
shall have an approved cavity barriers using intumescent fire stopping arrangements at 
every floor joints. 

d. 

Except for Open parking OR buildings which are less than 15 m in height, openings in 
exterior  walls  in  adjacent  storeys  shall  be  separated  vertically  to  protect  against  fire 
spread on the exterior of the buildings where the openings are within 1524 mm radius 
of each other horizontally and the opening in the lower storey is not a protected open-
ing with a fire protection rating of not less than 3/4 hour. Such openings shall be sepa-
rated vertically at least 915 mm by spandrel girders, exterior walls or other similar as-
semblies that have  a fire-resistance rating of at  least 1 hour or by flame  barriers that 
extend horizontally at least 760 mm beyond the exterior wall. Flame barriers shall also 
have a fire-resistance rating of at least 1 hour. Where separation spandrel is less than 
915 mm, the perimeter barrier system shall be tested, certified and listed with intended 
spandrel specifications, complete with installation guidelines. 

e.  Vertical separation between spaces leased to different tenants and between public and 
nonpublic spaces shall be protected to achieve a fire-resistance rating equal to that of 
the vertical wall assembly. 

f. 

The components of the curtain wall and fire stopping shall be such that if sections of the 
curtain wall are damaged or collapse, the integrity of firestop and its ability to provide 
the required fire resistance is not compromised. 

g.  All perimeter barrier systems shall be listed and approved system assemblies. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 129 of 1348 

 

3.3.  Firestop systems testing and acceptance 

 

3.3.1. 

For all types of firestop systems, only tested and Civil Defence listed systems shall 
be used as per tests required by Section 7. 

3.3.2. 

Through penetration firestop system ratings shall be established in accordance 
with ASTM E 814, UL 1479, EN 1366-3, FM 4990 or other equivalent  tests as the 
test method, approved by Civil Defence. See Section 7.1.12. 

3.3.3.  Membrane firestop system ratings shall be established in accordance with ASTM  

E119, E 814, UL 263, UL 1479, BS EN 1366-3, BS EN 1366-4, FM 4990 or other 
equivalent  tests as the test method, approved by Civil Defence. See                      
Section 7.1.14. 

3.3.4. 

3.3.5. 

Fire  resistive  joint system ratings shall be established in accordance with ASTM E 
1966, UL 2079, FM 4990, BS EN 1366-4 or other equivalent tests as the test meth-
od. See Section 7.1.13. 

Perimeter fire barrier system ratings shall be established in accordance with ASTM 
E 2307, BS EN 1364-3 (Full configuration test) or BS EN 1364-4 (Part configuration 
test) or other equivalent  tests using the Intermediate-Scale, Multi Story Test Ap-
paratus (ISMA) as the test method. See Section 7.1.17. 

3.3.6. 

System  rating:  The  rating  of  installed  firestop  systems  shall  be  equivalent  to  the 
rating of the barrier (floor/wall) in which the Firestopping is installed.  

3.3.7. 

Single source limitation:  Firestop systems for each kind of classified assembly shall 
be  obtained  from  a  single  manufacturer.  Materials  from  different  manufacturers 
shall not be installed in the same firestop system or opening. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 130 of 1348 

 

3.4.  Design, Installation, Inspection and Maintenance 

3.4.1.  Design, planning and preparation  

a.  Design, material selection, scheduling, approved contractor selection etc. shall 
be  Consultant’s  responsibility.  It  is  consultant’s  responsibility  to  recruit  Fire-
stopping specialists qualified as per Section 3.6.8., either in-house or hire Civil 
Defence approved House of expertise having Firestopping Specialists to design, 
supervise contractors and perform progressive inspections.  

3.4.2. 

Product systems and Submittal 

a.  All the products, as part of the system, shall bear design listing and approval 
label to conform to the construction type, penetrant type, annular space, joint 
gap and fire rating requirements of each separate assembly.  

b.  Product  manufacturer/supplier  shall  provide  a  formal  submittal  consisting  of 
system  design  listing  or  test  certifications,  including  illustrations,  from  an  ac-
credited  testing  laboratory  as  per  referenced  standards  that  is  applicable  to 
each system configuration. 

c.  Engineering Judgment (EJ) – Where there is no specific tested and listed fire-
stop  system  available  for  a  particular  configuration,  the  manufacturer  shall 
provide a site specific EJ, along with Consultant and Firestop system contrac-
tor’s stamp and acceptance.  

d.  Method Statement shall clearly define the manufacturer’s installation instruc-

tions. 

e.  Statement of manufacturer’s or installer’s standard warranty for minimum of 

10 years. 

f.  Manufacturers  shall  submit  an  undertaking  letter  in  understanding  with  Civil 
Defence that supplying any material that is non complaint to this code is illegal 
and punishable. 

g. 

It is main consultant’s responsibility to verify all the above. 

3.4.3.  Delivery, Storage and Handling 

a.  The products shall be delivered to project site in original, unopened containers 
or  packages  with  intact  and  legible  manufacturer’s  labels  identifying  product 
name,  product  manufacturer,  manufacturing  and  expiry  dates,  lot  number, 
design listing and classification marking.  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 131 of 1348 

 

b.  Products  shall  be  stored  and  handled  as  per  manufacturer’s  instructions  to 
prevent deterioration or damage due to moisture, temperature changes, con-
taminants, or other causes. 

c.  All materials shall be installed prior to expiration of shelf life. 

d. 

It is main consultant’s responsibility to verify all the above. 

3.4.4. 

Site examination and preparation 

a.  General  conditions  of  substrates,  opening  configurations,  penetrating  items, 
joint gaps, and other conditions affecting performance shall be thoroughly ex-
amined.  

b.  The  installer  shall  verify  that  all  pipes,  conduits,  cables,  and/or  other  items 
which  penetrate  fire-rated  construction  have  been  permanently  installed  be-
fore starting firestop installation. 

c. 

Installation  of  systems  shall  commence  only  after  unsatisfactory  conditions 
have been corrected. 

d. 

It is main consultant’s responsibility to verify all the above. 

3.4.5. 

Project conditions (environmental limitations) 

a.  Systems shall be installed when ambient or substrate temperatures are within 

limits as per manufacturer’s written instructions. 

b.  Do not install Firestopping when substrates are uncured, wet due to rain, frost, 
condensation, or other causes. Installer shall ensure that firestop materials are 
installed so as not to contaminate adjacent surfaces. 

c. 

It is main consultant’s responsibility to verify all the above. 

 

3.5.  Installation, Identification & Labeling  

3.5.1. 

Installation  

a. 

Installer shall strictly follow certified listed system including illustrations, instal-
lation drawings therein and manufacturer’s installation instructions. 

3.5.2. 

Identification & Labeling 

a. 

Identify  installed  firestop  systems  with  pressure-sensitive,  self-adhesive,  pre-
printed vinyl labels. Attach labels permanently to surfaces of penetrated con-
struction on both sides of firestop system  where labels will be visible to any-
one seeking to remove penetrating items or firestop systems.  

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 132 of 1348c.  The labels shall include the following information: 

i.  The  words  "Warning  –  Through-Penetration  Firestop  System  –  Do 

Not Disturb. Notify Building Management of Any Damage". 

ii.  Firestop product name with system listing number.  
iii.  Name  and  address  of  Manufacturer,  Installer  and  Consultant/House 

of Expertise. 

iv.  Installation date. 
 

d.  Labels and markings may be omitted if they would be visible in a finished area. 
Such  labels  and  tags  shall  be  available  with  facility  management  with  the 
written authorization of the Civil Defence.  

 
Installer qualification 

3.5.3. 

a. 

Installing contractors shall have Civil Defence listing and approval based on any 
of the following certifications. 

i.  FM certification on Class 4991 approval for firestop contractors. 
ii.  UL certification for qualified firestop contractor. 
iii.  IFC (International Firestop Council) Firestop expert exam certificate. 

 
b.  The installer shall be tested with written examination and licensed by Civil De-
fence. The Civil Defence license is based on qualification as per section 3.5.3.a. 
and the training and certification by the firestop manufacturer to install manu-
facturer’s products as per specified listed system requirements. 

 

3.6.  Inspection and Field Quality Control 

3.6.1. 

Inspection  of  through  penetration  firestop  systems  shall  be  in  accordance  with 
ASTM E 2174, Standard Practice for On-Site Inspection of Installed Fire Stops. 

3.6.2. 

Inspection of fire resistive joints and perimeter barriers shall be in accordance with 
ASTM  E  2393,  Standard  Practice  for  On-Site  Inspection  of  Installed  Fire  Resistive 
Joint Systems and Perimeter Fire Barriers. 

3.6.3. 

Inspection shall take place in successive stages as installation proceeds. 

3.6.4. 

Installed firestop systems shall not be concealed from view until the Firestopping 
specialist has inspected and approved each installation. 

  
3.6.5.  Do not proceed with installation for the next area until Firestopping specialists 
have determined that completed work shows compliance with requirements. 

 
3.6.6.  Work shall not be certified as completed unless approved by the consultant’s Fire-

stopping specialist or Civil Defence approved house of expertise. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 133 of 1348Inspector Qualification 

3.6.7. 
 

a. 

b. 

Inspections  shall  be  consultant’s  responsibility  and  ensure  that  contractor 
work  is  inspected  through  in-house  Firestopping  specialists  or  shall  hire  the 
services of Civil Defence approved House of Expertise. 

It  is  consultant’s  responsibility  to  recruit  in-house  qualified  Firestopping  spe-
cialists for design as well as inspection or to hire services of Civil Defence ap-
proved house of expertise, having registered Firestopping specialists.. 

c.  Consultant or house of expertise, who inspect the installation, shall certify and 
sign off the Firestopping installation inspections undertaken during progressive 
inspections  at  each  successive  stage  of  installations  in  report,  which  shall  be 
part  of  the  documentation  required  by  Civil  Defence  during  final  inspection 
and handing over. 

d.  Main  Consultant  or  Civil  Defence  approved  house  of  expertise  undertaking 

Firestopping inspections, shall have the following qualifications. 

i.  Accreditation to ISO/IEC 17020 or IAS AC 291 criteria or any other in-
ternational accreditation acceptable to Civil Defence and Municipali-
ty. 

ii.  2 Engineers, qualified in accordance with Section 3.6.8. 
iii.  Training and Certification by system manufacturers.  
iv.  3 years experience in Firestopping inspections.  
 

Firestopping Specialist Qualification 

3.6.8. 
 

a.  Fire  stopping  specialists  of  consultant’s  in-house  team  or  Civil  Defence  ap-
proved house of expertise undertaking Firestopping design, consultancy or in-
spection shall have the following qualifications.  

i.  Bachelor’s degree in engineering. 
ii.  Certifications from any of the following. 
 

ii.1. FM Firestop exams certification. 
ii.2. UL/ULC Firestop exams certification. 
ii.3.  Intertek’s IQP program certification 
ii.4. IFC (International Firestop Council) Firestop Expert exam  certifi-

cate. 

 
iii.  5 years experience in Firestopping systems’ design and inspection. 
iv.  Training and Certification by system manufacturers. 

 
b.  The  Firestopping  specialists  of  consultant’s  in-house  team or of  Civil Defence 
approved house of expertise, undertaking Firestopping design, consultancy or 
inspection shall be certified and licensed by Civil Defence, based on their quali-
fications as required by Section 3.6.8.a. and written examination.  

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 134 of 1348 

3.7.  Maintenance & Management 
 

3.7.1. 

 
3.7.2. 

Provide protection and maintain conditions during & after installation that ensure 
installed firestop systems are without damage or deterioration at the time of Sub-
stantial Completion.  If, despite such protection, damage  or deterioration occurs, 
damaged/deteriorated systems shall be removed and replaced with new ones. 

The condition of installed firestop systems shall be visually inspected by the owner 
or  owner’s  representative  annually.  Damaged,  altered  or  breached  firestop  sys-
tems  shall  be  properly  repaired,  restored  or  replaced  to  comply  with  applicable 
codes as per the guidelines of Civil Defense.  

 
3.7.3.  Any  new  openings  made  therein  for  passage  of  through  penetrants shall  be  pro-
tected with approved firestop system to comply with applicable codes as per the 
guidelines of Civil Defense. 

 

3.8.  Civil Defence Acceptance 

3.8.1. 

The main consultant, the firestop system manufacturer, firestop system installer, 
firestop specialist and the house of expertise shall jointly sign off the installation 
and provide final inspection report for Civil Defence’ acceptance as evidence of 
compliance.  

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 135 of 1348 

4. Façade and Exterior Wall Covering Systems  
 

4.1. Applicability   

 

 

 

4.1.1.    The provision of this section specifies the minimum requirements for the classifica-
tion, combustibility, surface burning and flame spread ratings, design, installation, 
inspection, and maintenance of exterior façade wall cladding, balcony coverings and 
components such as, Metal Composite Panels, Aluminum Composite Panels, Polycar-
bonate Panels, EIFS, ETICS, GRC, GRFC, GRP, Glazing, insulation, sealants etc.  

 
4.1.2.   The weather protection of buildings is not the scope or intention of this section. 

Thermal and Weather protection aspect of the building façade, such as protection 
from temperature, wind, water, pressure etc., shall comply with Municipality regula-
tions, assembly tests and requirements.  

 
4.1.3.   The intention of this section is to ensure that flame spread on exterior façade is re-

stricted.  

4.1.4.    This section applies only to non load bearing exterior walls.   
 
4.1.5.    Where exterior walls are required to be loadbearing, such walls shall comply with 

relevant sections of this Chapter.   

 

4.2. Material Tests   

 
4.2.1.    Except for natural stones and concrete, only materials, tested, listed with Civil De-

fence and complying to the following sections shall be allowed on exterior facades, 
based on the building height and occupancy types. 

a.  Metal Composite Materials (MCM, ACP) complying to Section 4.6.   
b.  Exterior Insulation and Finish Systems (EIFS) and External Insulation Composite 

System (ETICS) complying to Section 4.7.  

c.  Polycarbonate External Wall and Façade System (PEWFS) complying to                             

Section 4.8.   

d.  Sandwich Panels complying to Section 4.9.   
e.  GRC /GRFC and GRP Systems to Section 4.10. 
f.  Glazing Systems complying to Section 5.   

 
4.2.2.    Where “Assembly Tests” are mandated by Section 4.2.1., the tests shall be conduct-

ed for the entire system assembly, that is intended for use on building façade, in-
cluding  wall panels, cavities, insulation, panel rails, joints, sealants, seams, fasteners, 
barriers and other construction details. Laboratories testing assembly tests shall en-
sure that the test specimen is duplicated as per intended final installation specifica-
tions, including dimensions, cavities, joints and sealants. Laboratories shall ensure 
that façade assembly tests are not ‘over engineered’ purely to pass test criteria.  

 
4.2.3.    The tests shall clearly indicate “Pass” or “Fail” criteria and such results shall be clear-
ly noted on the Test Certificates (and CoC, Certificate of Compliance), in evaluation 
of the following minimum requirements.                                                                                                           
a. The wall assembly shall resist flame propagation over the face of the exterior wall.                    
b. The wall assembly shall resist flame propagation over the face of the interior of 
the wall assembly and cavity.                                                                                                                   
c. The  wall assembly shall resist flame propagation from one story to the next.                            
d. The wall assembly shall resist flame propagation from compartment of fire origin 
to the adjacent compartment. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 136 of 13484.3. Flame Spread on Exterior Façade  

 
4.3.1.   Building fires that envelope the façade may be initiated externally from outside the 
building sources such as BBQ activity in the balconies, trash can fires, fire works dis-
plays, careless disposals of cigarette butts, electrical fires from cables running in fa-
çade cavities or arson. Fires can originate internally from internal room fire loads of 
the building and spread to exterior façade through openings on the exterior walls 
such as doors, windows, shattered glazing because of flashover.  

 
4.3.2.   Interior fires are intervened and controlled by automatic sprinkler system or by fire 
fighters. However, when the fire outgrows fire fighter’s efforts or the sprinkler sys-
tem and reaches flash over stage, it leaps out from the openings onto the exterior 
façade or cavities behind the façade of the building causing “leap frog” effect.  

 
4.3.3.   At this stage, if the façade material delaminates, exposing the core, if the core of the 
facade material is combustible, if the cladding system components such as sealants, 
linings, insulation are combustible, the flames start consuming the combustible ma-
terial on the façade, spreading along the surface of the façade and along the cavities 
behind the façade.  

 
4.3.4.   If the floor slab fire stopping is absent or fire stop material is not approved and not 

installed as per standards, if the curtainwall is not listed, the flames penetrate 
through the gaps and reach for the upper floors. Flames can even propagate down-
wards if the material on façade is flammable.  

 
4.3.5.   Such propagated flames find the other openings of the building from exterior and 
enter back into the buildings, feeding on the interior fire loads. This “Reverse leap 
frog” effect continues along the building from floor to floor, to height and width, 
consuming the building façade swiftly. 

4.3.6.   Cavity can be part of the façade system by design or cavity can be created by com-
bustible materials on façade system or poor integrity of the façade panels or poor 
performance of perimeter joint systems and fire stopping systems or combinations 
of these factors. As flame propagates and enters this cavity behind façade system, it 
can elongate ten times its length in its search for oxygen in the confined space of 
such cavity, thus burning behind the façade system unnoticed from outside for many 
floors above the fire origin.  

4.3.7.   As the intense heat develops behind the façade and flames continue to grow, fa-

çade panels delaminate, exposing more core material to the flame, resulting in a 
sudden engulfing of vast area and multiple stories of the building façade under fire.  

4.3.8.   Apart from combustible façade materials, poor installation, poor joint detailing, poor 

mechanical detailing in fixing insulation and façade panels and poor railing system 
installations contribute to the rapid façade flame spread and collapse of façade pan-
els and frames, making external fire fighting extremely difficult.  

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 137 of 13484.3.9.   Thus the whole mechanism involved in façade flame spread, after the initial ignition, 

can be pin pointed to the following factors.  

a. Readily Combustible Core of the façade material (Insulation/Sealants/Panels)   
b. Inferior Façade Panel integrity (Poor Panel make and skin bonding)                                            
c. Non tested and Non listed Façade, Sealants and Fire stopping systems                               
d. Poor installation of Façade and Fire stopping Systems                                                               
e. Lack of Thermal barriers and Cavity fire barriers  

4.3.10.  The initial ignition of the fire can be attributed to human behavior as well. See Chap-

ter 18., Section 2.21. Responsibilities of Residents. 

 
4.4. Façade Approval from Civil Defence   

4.4.1. Ten Point Approach to mitigate Façade Fires 
 
 

Following 10 approaches have been adopted by UAE Civil Defence to tackle the caus-
es of Façade flame spread, pointed out in Section 4.3.9.   

4.4.1.1.   Core of the Façade material shall be tested in exposed form as per test 

requirements of this code.  

4.4.1.2.   Façade panel as a product shall be tested as per test requirements of this 

code.  

4.4.1.3.   Façade system as wall assembly shall be tested or listed as per test re-

quirements of this code. 

4.4.1.4.   Curtainwall, Perimeter joints and fire stopping shall be a listed system.  

4.4.1.5.   Cavity Fire Barrier bands shall be provided in concealed cavities between 

façade and primary substrate, at every slab.  

4.4.1.6.   Fire Breaks shall be provided vertically on exterior façade.  

4.4.1.7.   Exterior Sprinklers should be considered for the balconies having com-

bustible facade. Interior window sprinklers should be considered for the 
glazing. See Chapter 9.  

4.4.1.8.   Consultants shall have competent and qualified façade specialists in-

house or shall hire Civil Defence approved house of expertise who have 
experience and expertise in façade consultancy for Façade design, system 
selection and supervision of the façade contractor.  

4.4.1.9.   Façade contractor and fabricator shall be approved by Civil Defence, with 

valid Civil Defence License.  

4.4.1.10.  Façade installation shall be inspected throughout installation process and 

certified by Consultant or Civil Defence approved House of Expertise.  

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 138 of 1348 

 

4.4.2. Component (Product/Panel) Approval   
 

4.4.2.1.   Approval of “product” or “panel” or component is manufacturer’s responsi-
bility. Manufacturer or supplier shall test the individual product or compo-
nent as part of the assembly (TEST 1, as per Tables 1.14., 1.15., 1.16., 1.17., 
as applicable) to evaluate flame spread characteristics, droplets and smoke 
emission of the core, the skin, adhesive, panel and the product, and obtain 
approval and product registration from Civil Defence. The Civil Defence cer-
tificate shall only be for the product and permission to be installed “only on 
low rise buildings”. 

 

4.4.3. Wall System or Wall Assembly Approval   

 
4.4.3.1.   Approval of façade wall “system” intended to be used as “assembly” on 

façade of a building shall be the responsibility of the consultant and façade 
contractor. The consultant shall ensure that the façade contractors or fabri-
cators test the façade system as per Civil Defence regulation and configura-
tions. (TEST 2, as per Tables 1.14., 1.15., 1.16., 1.17. as applicable). 

 
4.4.3.2.   Where manufacturer or supplier undertakes both tests, TEST 1, as pre Sec-

 
4.4.3.3.  

 

tion 4.4.2.1. as well as TEST 2, as per Section 4.4.3.1., and produces the 
“system” test certificates, the Civil Defence registration and certificate shall 
be for the product including full system and permission to be installed on 
exterior façade of any building, provided that the façade fabricator under-
takes that project façade arrangement matches the tested and certified 
wall assembly arrangement.  

The system manufacturer or supplier and the fabricators shall provide a 
formal submittal to the Municipality and Civil Defence material approval 
department for the product registration, that shall consist of the following. 

a. Product Data – Manufacturer's Specifications, Technical Data and Materi-
al Safety Data Sheet for each material including the composition and lim-
itations, if any.   

b. Design Listings and certifications – Core test certifications, Product test 
certifications, Assembly test certifications, System design listing or test 
certifications, including illustrations, from an accredited testing laborato-
ry as per referenced standards that is applicable to each system configu-
ration. Test reports without certification from accredited laboratories is 
invalid.                

c. Method Statement shall clearly define component list and the manufac-

turer’s installation instructions.  

d. Statement of Manufacturer’s standard warranty for minimum of 10 

years.      

 e. An undertaking letter in understanding with Civil Defence, that supplying 

any material or system that is non compliant to this code is illegal and 
punishable. 

 

4.4.3.4.   Where the building envelope is uniquely shaped and designed, or there is no clear dis-
tinction between vertical façade and horizontal roofing, or where a single envelope is 
installed as roofing as well as façade envelope, such materials and system assembly 
shall be tested for both façade as well as roofing requirements in accordance with Sec-
tion 4, Section 5 and Section 6 of this chapter. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 139 of 13484.4.4. Design, Specifications and Proposal Approval  

 
4.4.4.1.  

It is consultant’s responsibility to recruit Façade specialists in house or hire 
Civil Defence approved House of Expertise to design the façade system in 
complete compliance with this code.  

 
4.4.4.2.   Consultant’s façade design submittal to Civil Defence shall be during project 
design NOC application, along with architecture, fire alarm, fire fighting and 
smoke control proposals. See Annexure 1. Drawing Submission Require-
ments. 

 
4.4.4.3.   Consultant’s façade design shall be complete with system listings, material 

approval certifications, drawings, sections, illustrations specifying installa-
tion methods as per manufacturer’s guide-lines, insulations, thermal barri-
ers, panel railing, cavity fire barrier locations/specifications, primary sub-
strate details and fixing details.  

 
4.4.4.4.  

Engineering Judgments (EJ), if any, shall be permitted where Civil Defence 
has no objections. Such Engineering Judgment submissions to Civil Defence 
shall be site specific, prepared and stamped jointly by main consultant, 
House of expertise, Cladding contractor, façade system manufacturers and 
façade installers.  

 
4.4.4.5.   Where the building envelope is uniquely shaped and designed, or there is 

no clear distinction between façade and roofing, or where a single envelope 
is installed as roofing as well as façade envelope, such materials and system 
assembly shall satisfy both façade and roofing test requirements and shall 
be subjected to “mock-up” tests, if Civil Defence initiates such a require-
ment based on the proposal reviews. 

 
4.4.5. Installation  

 
4.4.5.1.  

 
4.4.5.2.  

 

It is consultant’s responsibility to ensure that the installers and fabricators 
hired are qualified and approved by Civil Defence.  See Chapter 18. Section 
2.5. Consultant’s Responsibilities. 

It is consultant’s responsibility to ensure that the installation is carried out 
by Civil Defence and Municipality approved installers and fabricators as per 
the design specifications, system manufacturer's installation instructions 
and complies with code and the local  construction regulations.  

4.4.6. Installer Qualification 
 

4.4.6.1.  

 
4.6.6.2.  

Installer specializing in façade and cladding system shall be trained  as per 
manufacturer’s standards and guidelines and certified by the system manu-
facturer.  

The trained and experienced installer shall be qualified and licensed by Civil 
Defence. The Civil Defence written examinations and license shall be based 
on the training and certification provided by the system manufacturer to 
install manufacturer’s products as per specified listed system requirements.  

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 140 of 1348 

4.4.7. Inspection  

 
4.4.7.1.  

 
4.4.7.2.  

 
4.4.7.3.  

Special inspections shall be required for all façade and cladding systems. 
Inspection shall take place in successive stages as installation proceeds. 
Such successive stages shall be at every 20% intervals of the total building 
height. 

It is consultant’s responsibility to ensure that installer’s work is inspected 
during construction and installation at each stage.  

It is consultant’s responsibility to recruit in-house qualified façade engi-
neers for inspections or to hire façade inspection services of Civil Defence 
approved House of Expertise.  

 
4.4.7.4.   Main consultant or house of expertise, who inspect the installation, shall 

certify and signoff the façade and cladding installations undertaken during 
progressive inspections at each successive stage of installations in report 
which shall be part of the documentation required by Civil Defence during 
final inspection and handing over.  

 
4.4.7.5.   Main consultant or Civil Defence approved House of Expertise individual 

inspector undertaking Façade inspections shall have the following qualifica-
tions.  

 

a.  Accreditation to ISO/IEC 17020 or relevant IAS criteria or ICC Specialist 

building inspection training and certification or an equivalent interna-
tional criteria acceptable to Municipality and Civil Defence.  

b.  Training and certification by system manufacturers.  
c.  3 years experience in fire and life safety aspects of Façade inspections.  

 
4.4.8. Façade Specialist Qualifications  

 
4.4.8.1.  

 

4.4.8.2.  

 

The Façade Specialists of Consultant’s in-house team or of Civil Defence 
approved House of Expertise, undertaking façade consultancy, design or 
inspection shall have the following qualifications. 

a.  Bachelor’s degree in engineering.  
b.  5 years experience in fire and life safety aspects of Façade engineering.  
c.  Training and certification by system manufacturers. 
  
The Façade Specialists of Consultant’s in-house team or of Civil Defence 
approved House of Expertise, undertaking façade consultancy, design or 
inspection shall be certified by Civil Defence based on their qualifications as 
required by Section 4.4.8.1., manufacturer’s training certifications and 
written examination.  

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 141 of 1348 

 

 

4.5. General Requirements for Exterior Façade Systems 

4.5.1. Coatings on primary substrate  
 

4.5.1.1.   Bitumen, bituminous products and flammable agents as anti-corrosion or 
water-proofing coatings shall not be applied on primary substrates, either 
on metals or concrete. Bitumen has fire point of 1750C and propagates 
building envelope fires.  

 

4.5.2. Building Fire Rating  
 

4.5.2.1.   Façade materials, exterior wall systems, claddings and insulation installed 

on any building shall not reduce the fire resistance rating of the exterior 
wall where required by other sections of this Chapter. 

 

4.5.3. Thermal Barrier  
 

4.5.3.1.   Façade Cladding Materials such as MCM and ACP shall be completely sepa-

rated from the building interior and plenum by a thermal barrier, complying 
to test standards of Section 7.1.11. of this chapter.  

 
4.5.3.2.   Required thermal barriers shall not be installed on the walls or frames with 

adhesives alone. Thermal barriers shall be fixed mechanically on primary 
substrate, structural frame or the wall or on rails as appropriate.  

 
4.5.3.3.   Thermal barrier is not mandatory only when MCM or ACP or cladding mate-
rials are used on balconies and minor architectural appendages on exterior 
wall. 

 
4.5.3.4.  

 

In all cases the Building Exterior Base wall must be imperforate and provide 
a nominal 15 minutes fire resistance ( Insulation and integrity). 

4.5.4. Cavity Fire Barrier  
 

4.5.4.1.   Cavity Fire Barriers shall be incorporated into façade designs, including ar-

chitectural features with uninterrupted vertical columns (e.g. High Rise 
‘Fins’), at every floor horizontally around window openings on all sides to 
limit fire breakout from a room into the adjacent cavity. This cavity barrier 
shall not be a thermal bridge. 

 
 4.5.4.2.   Cavity Fire Barriers shall be incorporated into façade design at every floor 
vertically to restrict flame within continuous cavities or where cavities 
bridge the perimeter firestopping. Perimeter Firestopping systems shall 
be installed as per Section 3 of this chapter. 

 
 4.5.4.3.   Cavity fire barrier shall be of Non combustible material, in accordance 
 
 
 4.5.4.4.   The cavity fire barrier shall be 100 mm high and, where the thermal insula-

with Section 7.1.45. of this chapter. 

tion is not of equivalent fire resistance to the cavity barrier, shall run 
through insulation horizontally at each floor level and vertically on each 
face of façade as required by Section 4.5.4.2.  

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 142 of 1348 4.5.4.5.   The installation shall ensure that compartmentation is established between 

the façade skin and the primary substrate and no cavity exists for fire to 
pass through. See figures 1.19.a and figure 1.19.b. 

  
4.5.4.6.   The cavity fire barrier shall be mechanically bonded to the primary sub-

strate or structural frame and extended or compressed behind the finish 
façade panel to ensure that no fire path are created between the barrier 
and substrate or external façade panel.  

 
 4.5.4.7.   Where cavity is necessary part of ventilated façade design and cavity needs 
to be maintained, an intumescent system, approved and listed for the pur-
pose shall be fixed as cavity fire barrier band. These intumescent bands 
serve as fire barriers when exposed to flames and shall expand to seal the 
gaps. 

 

 
 

4.5.5. Fire Breaks  
 

4.5.5.1.  

It is highly recommended to provide “fire breaks” where cladding materials 
are installed on exterior façade by restricting the vertical length of building 
envelope of cladding materials to not more than 15 m, followed by 6 m of 
non-combustible material as envelope finish such as concrete or tiles or 
materials approved as per Section 7.1.45. , in an alternative manner along 
the building envelope’s face. 

 
 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 143 of 13484.5.6. Groove Sealants, Gaskets, Backer Rod and vapour barrier systems  
 

4.5.6.1.   Use of flammable silicon or fillers or non rated groove sealants, materials 
in between panel joints is not permitted unless these joint fillers are test-
ed as per Section 7.1.45 and part of their full wall assembly and were used 
in achieving “pass criteria” as the Wall Assembly “Large Scale Tests”. See 
figures 1.19.a and figure 1.19.b. 

 
4.5.6.2.   Vapour Barrier systems (VBS) and membranes are generally provided to 

resist water vapour and are often an essential part of the façade system. 
Vapour barriers, particularly rubber, bituminous based materials, maybe 
combustible by their nature and may affect the overall performance of 
the façade system in respect of fire development and spread. Therefore 
the VBS product should be checked against the MSDS for base content 
(See Section 4.5.1.1). VBS products must be registered and Licensed by 
the Civil Defence and must achieve EN13501-1 Class A as per Section 
7.1.45. 

 
4.5.6.3.   EPDM products, Rubber sheeting and architectural carpets are creating 

new design possibilities as building skins. EPDM rubber (ethylene propyl-
ene diene monomer rubber) and similar rubber products must not be 
used as a full VBS/Façade Liner. However it is acceptable in other dis-
crete locations, such as Curtain Wall Gaskets or window waterproofing 
provided the fire performance achieves a minimum of  EN 13501-1 C, 
S2,d0., as per Section 7.1.45. 

 
4.5.6.4.   Artificial turf has been typically used for sports grounds or indoor solu-

tions, but now this surface covering is being used in the design of indoor 
and outdoor spaces in horizontal and vertical applications. Where such 
applications are used as floor coverings they shall be tested to EN 13501
-1 and achieve a minimum of Cfl,S1 where the premises are provided 
with a sprinkler system or, with the exception of areas being used for 
Assembly, where the installation is completely out doors. Where the 
material is being used as an internal wall covering it must comply with 
Section 7.1.4. or when proposed as an External wall covering, it shall 
comply with the requirements of chapter 1 Section 4, achieve ASTM E84 
class A and EN13501-1 Class A2 minimum. The Façade system which the 
material forms a part must also be tested to NFPA 285 and NFPA 268 
( ‘no ignition at 12.5 kw/m2 at 20 minutes)  

 
4.5.7. Openings (Window, Doors, Ventilation) Flashing  
 

4.5.7.1.   Window (opening) flashing where cladding materials intersect shall be of 
steel formed and fixed mechanically  or an appropriate and Civil Defence 
approved Fire Stopping/safing system fire to completely line windows or 
openings and overlap onto both exterior and interior surfaces of wall as-
sembly.  It must be ensured that any void or cavity between the exterior 
and interior surfaces of the façade system is protected to prevent fire ac-
cessing the space. See figures 1.19.a and figure 1.19.b. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 144 of 13484.5.8. Architectural features  
 

4.5.8.1.   Architectural features shall comply to all the relevant requirements of Sec-

tion 4. 

 

 
4.5.9. Openings on the exterior walls  
 

4.5.9.1.   Openings on exterior walls in adjacent stories shall be separated vertically 

to protect against fire spread on the exterior of the buildings where the 
openings are within 1524 mm of each other horizontally. Such openings 
shall be separated vertically not less than 914 mm by spandrel gird-
ers, exterior walls or other similar assemblies that have a fire-resistance 
rating of not less than 1 hour, rated for exposure to fire from both sides, or 
by flame barriers that extend horizontally not less than 762 mm beyond 
the exterior wall. Flame barriers shall have a fire resistance rating of not 
less than 1 hour. 

 
4.5.9.2.   Where a Spandrel Panel is used to satisfy the requirement in Section 

4.5.9.1., it shall be ensured that the materials used and spandrel panel as 
system provides a minimum of 60 minutes fire resistance from BOTH sides 
of the panel. All transoms and Mullions must be protected in this respect. 

 
4.5.9.3.   Fire safing forming the perimeter edge protection must ensure the same 

performance as the structural floor slab in respect of F and T ratings. 

 
4.5.9.3.   Aluminium Back Pans shall not be accepted. 
 

 
4.5.10. Installation of Exterior Façade Lighting  
 

4.5.10.1.  Façade lighting fixtures have high intensity light and heat. When over heat-
ed or poorly installed, these fixtures emit intense heat and can be cause of 
fire ignition source when in contact with readily combustible materials. 

 
4.5.10.2.  Flood Lighting fixtures shall not be installed directly on façade surface, 

wood, plastic, insulation, façade cavity with combustible material etc. Flood 
lighting fixtures shall be installed such that lighting fixture heat is not dissi-
pated directly onto the façade surface. Appropriate steel framing and non 
combustible thermal insulation shall separate the lighting fixtures from fa-
çade surface. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 145 of 1348 
4.5.11. Installation of Electrical Equipment on Facade  
 

4.5.11.1.  Installation of electrical equipment such as Air Conditioning units, Kitchen 
Exhaust ducts, Heaters, Boilers, Diesel generators directly in contact with 
Façade surface can be source of fire ignition. 

 
4.5.11.2.  Poor installation, poor wiring and overheating of such electrical equipment 

and its contact with combustible insulation or façade material shall be 
avoided. Electrical equipment shall be separated from façade surface with 
proper steel frames, steel lining, metal conduit for wiring and non combus-
tible insulation coverings. 

4.5.11.3.  Façade cavity shall not be used for routing electrical cabling, LPG or natural 

gas piping and hot water piping. 

 

 

4.5.11.3.  Regular maintenance of the electrical equipment shall be ensured to keep 

the equipment in good working condition. 

 
 
4.5.12. Installation of Advertising Banners and Hoardings on Facade  
 

4.5.12.1.  Installation of non approved advertising billboard material on approved 

façade material can compromise the exterior wall’s safety. 

 
4.5.12.2.  Sign boards, billboards, advertising banners shall comply with Table 1.9.56. 
 
4.5.12.2.  Flammable, Combustible, Plastic and Foam materials shall not be used for 

advertising or billboard on façade envelope. 

 

 
4.5.13. Housekeeping  

 

4.5.13.1.  Competent house keeping shall be ensured in every building to keep exteri-
or façade surface clean and free from flammable and combustible materials 
within the vicinity. Trash accumulation near façade surface shall be avoid-
ed. Trash cans shall not be placed adjacent to exterior façade surface. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 146 of 1348 
 

 

 

Figure 1.19.a.: Typical MCM / ACP Installation on Block wall  

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 147 of 1348 
 

 

 

Figure 1.19.b..: Typical MCM / ACP Installation on Frame 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 148 of 1348 
4.6. Metal Composite Materials and Panels (MCM, ACP)  

4.6.1.  Metal Composite Panels (such as Aluminium Composite Panels, ACP), other than 

sandwich panels used on façade and exterior wall assembly shall comply with gen-
eral requirements of Section 4.5 and the specific requirements of Section 4.6.   
 

4.6.2. Definition  

 
4.6.2.1.  A factory manufactured panel consisting of metal skins bonded to both fac-

es of a “core”. All MCM’s shall be tested and approved at the maximum 
thickness intended for use and intended assemblies. However, MCM’s 
(Such as ACP’s) shall have a minimum exterior skin thickness of 0.019 in. 
(0.5 mm), a minimum interior skin thickness of 0.010 in. (0.25 mm) and a 
maximum panel thickness of ¼ in. (6.3 mm) where installed on facades and 
exterior walls. 

 
 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 149 of 1348 

 

4.6.3. Specific Requirements  

 
4.6.3.1.  MCM/ACP shall be permitted to be installed on the façade and exterior of 

buildings classified as Type I, Type II, Type III, or Type IV construction, as 
defined in Chapter 1, Table 1.7., and such installation shall not change the 
construction classification or fire performance of the building. 

 
4.6.3.2.  MCM/ACPs shall be Marked/labeled to verify its certification mark from 

accredited certification body. 

 
4.6.3.3.  MCM/ACP Core shall not be of foam plastic insulation or LDPE (Low Density 
Polyethylene) or any such expanded plastic having density less than 320 kg/
m3).  

 
4.6.3.4.  MCM/ACP Core shall be tested and evaluated separately. Core (exposed 

without skin) used in Cladding and façade Panels can be of plastic or miner-
al or combination of such material having flame and smoke spread charac-
teristics as per TEST 1 in accordance with Table 1.14.a. and Table 1.14.b. 
test requirements. 

 
4.6.3.5.  The fire resistance performance of Fire Rated façade system is a function of 

the base exterior wall when tested to ASTM E119 (or equivalent) and NOT 
only the MCM/ACP panel element. It must be made clear by the MCM/ACP 
manufacturer that their products have no Resistance to Fire qualities when 
tested as a system in accordance with Table 1.14.b. unless the MCM/ACP 
panel has been tested as an individual component product to ASTM E119.  

 

4.6.4. Test Certifications  

 
4.6.4.1.  MCM/ACP panels and facade systems on non-fire resistance rated and non 

load bearing exterior wall coverings shall comply with Table 1.14.a. 

 
4.6.4.2.   MCM/ACP panels and facade systems on fire resistance rated exterior and 
non-load bearing wall assembly coverings shall comply with Table 1.14.b. 

 

4.6.5. Application 

 
4.6.6.1.   The occupancies and type of buildings that are allowed to have MCM or 

ACP shall be in accordance with Table 1.14.a. and Table 1.14.b.  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 150 of 1348 

 

Table 1.14.a.: MCM and ACP On Non-Fire Resistance rated and Non-Load bearing Exterior wall 

coverings-Test Requirements 

OCCUPANCY AND TYPE OF 

TEST 1 

TEST 2 

BUILDING 

MCM/ ACP  CORE AND 

MCM/ ACP PANELS WITH 

PANEL AS  PRODUCT 

WALL ASSEMBLY 

1.  SUPER HIGHRISE BUILDING 

i.  Core shall be tested to the  

v.   BS 8414 –1 Or 2                           

2.  HIGHRISE BUILDING  

3.  MALLS 

4.  THEME PARKS 

5.  SCHOOLS 

6.  HOSPITALS 

7.  ASSEMBLY 

criteria iii and iv. 

ii.  Panel shall be tested with 
the thickness intended to 
the criteria iii and iv. 

 
iii.   EN 13501-1                                     

 
OR 
 
vi.    NFPA 285                         

With pass criteria                            
as per BRE 135 

With pass criteria                                         
With pass criteria                            
A1 OR A2-s1-d0                                                              
“Pass” 

 
AND      
 
iv.   ASTM D1929                                  

 
OR 
 
vii.   FM 4881                             

MCM/ACP shall have self 
ignition temperature of not 
less than 3430C.  

With pass criteria                            
“Pass” 

 
OR 
 
viii.  ISO 13785-2                   

With pass criteria                            
“Pass” 

 

8.  LOWRISE BUILDING 

i.  Core shall be tested to the  

v.   BS 8414 –1 Or 2                           

9.  MIDRISE BUILDING  

10.  WAREHOUSE 

11.  INDUSTRIAL 

 

 

criteria iii and iv. 

ii.  Panel shall be tested with 
the thickness intended to 
the criteria iii and iv. 

 
iii.   EN 13501-1                                     

 
OR 
 
vi.    NFPA 285                         

With pass criteria                            
as per BRE 135 

With pass criteria                                         
With pass criteria                            
B-s1-d0                                                               
“Pass” 

 
AND      
 
iv.   ASTM D1929                                                   

 
OR 
 
vii.   FM 4881                             

MCM/ACP shall have self 
ignition temperature of not 
less than 3430C.  

With pass criteria                            
“Pass” 

 
OR 
 
viii.  ISO 13785-2                   

With pass criteria                            
“Pass” 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 151 of 1348 

 

Table 1.14.b.: MCM and ACP on Fire Resistance rated Exterior wall coverings-Test Requirements 

OCCUPANCY AND TYPE OF 

TEST 1 

TEST 2 

BUILDING 

MCM/ ACP  CORE AND 

MCM/ ACP PANELS IN 

PANEL AS  PRODUCT 

WALL ASSEMBLY 

1.  ANY BUILDING WITH ANY HEIGHT 

i.  Core shall be tested to the  

v.   ASTM E 119                              

AND ANY OCCUPANCY                              

criteria iii and iv. 

ii.  Panel shall be tested with 
the thickness intended to 
the criteria iii and iv. 

With pass criteria                            
“1 Hr or 2 Hr OR 3 Hr as 
per required fire rating of 
the wall. 

 
 
 
OR 
iii.    EN 13501-1                                     
 
vi.   UL 263                                            

With pass criteria                                         
A1 OR A2-s1-d0                                                              

With pass criteria                            
“1 Hr or 2 Hr OR 3 Hr as 
per required fire rating of 
the wall. 

 
AND      
 
iv.   ASTM D1929                                  
 
OR 
 
vii.   EN 1362-3                                     

MCM/ACP shall have self 
ignition temperature of not 
less than 3430C.  

With pass criteria                            
“1 Hr or 2 Hr OR 3 Hr as 
per required fire rating of 
the wall. 

 
OR 
 
viii.  EN 1362-4                                     

With pass criteria                            
“1 Hr or 2 Hr OR 3 Hr as 
per required fire rating of 
the wall. 

 
 

HAVING REQUIREMENT OF FIRE 

RESISTANCE RATED EXTERIOR 

WALL CONSTRUCTION, WHERE 

REQUIRED BY OTHER SECTIONS OF 

THIS CHAPTER. 

 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 152 of 1348 
4.7. Exterior Insulation and Finish Systems (EIFS) and External 

Thermal Insulation Composite System (ETICS)  

4.7.1.  Exterior Insulation and Finish Systems (EIFS) and External Thermal Insulation Compo-
site System (ETICS) used on façade and exterior wall assembly shall comply with gen-
eral requirements of Section 4.5 and the specific requirements of Section 4.7.   
 

4.7.2. Definition  

 

4.7.2.1.   Exterior insulation and finish systems (EIFS) are materials, assemblies made up of 

layers of foam plastic insulation or expanded polystyrene or mineral insulation 
with adhesives and fiber reinforcement, used in exterior non load bearing walls as 
wall coverings and exterior cladding systems 

 
 
 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 153 of 1348 

 

4.7.3. Specific Requirements  

 
4.7.3.1.   EIFS and ETICS shall be constructed such that it meets the performance 

characteristics required as per ASTM E 2568. 

  
4.7.3.2.   EIFS and ETICS shall be certified and listed by a third party independent 

testing and Certification body, approved by Civil Defence.  

 
4.7.3.3.  EIFS and ETICS shall be Marked/labeled to verify its certification mark from 

accredited certification body. 

 
4.7.3.4.   The layers and core materials shall be tested separately and entire assem-

bly including ornaments, trims and moldings’ with intended thickness, 
joints, seams, fasteners and wall arrangement shall be tested in accordance 
with Table 1.15.a.  

 
4.7.3.5.   Where EIFS or ETICS is installed on Fire rated or load bearing walls, the wall 

arrangement shall be tested in accordance with Table 1.15.b.  

 
4.7.3.6.   EIFS shall be specified in accordance with ANSI/EIMA 99-A (Latest Edition) 
‘American National Standard for EIFS’. ETICS shall meet the performance 
requirements as per ETAG 004 (Latest Edition) ‘Guidelines for European 
Technical Approval of ETICS with Rendering’  

 
4.7.3.7.   Requirements of the ANSI/EIMA 99-A or ETAG 004 guidelines shall be fol-
lowed independently. Using parts from each of the guidelines is not per-
mitted. 

 
4.7.4. Test Certifications  

 
4.7.4.1.   EIFS and ETICS panels and facade systems on non-fire resistance rated and 

non load bearing exterior wall coverings shall comply with Table 1.15.a. 

 
4.7.4.2.   EIFS and ETICS panels and facade systems on fire resistance rated exterior 

wall assembly coverings shall comply with Table 1.15.b. 

 

4.7.5. Application 

 
4.6.6.1.   The occupancies and type of buildings that are allowed to have EIFS and 
ETICS  shall be in accordance with Table 1.15.a. and Table 1.15.b.  

 
 

Points to Ponder 

Governments all over the world advocate usage of green building products, 
which contribute to high energy efficient performances of buildings and            
reduce the carbon footprints.  
 
However, there is a conflict when these sustainable building products are 
challenged with their fire resistance performance. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 154 of 1348 

 

Table 1.15.a.: EIFS and ETICS on Non-Fire Resistance rated and Non-Load bearing Exterior wall 

coverings-Test Requirements 

OCCUPANCY AND TYPE OF 

TEST 1 

TEST 2 

BUILDING 

EIFS/ETICS                           

EIFS/ETICS AS                        

COMPONENTS AND          

WALL ASSEMBLY 

PANEL AS  PRODUCT 

1.  ANY BUILDING  

i.  All components of the EIFS 

iii.   BS 8414 –1 Or 2                           

With pass criteria                            
as per BRE 135 

 
AND 
 
ii.    NFPA 268                             

 
OR 
 
v.   FM 4881                             

With pass criteria                   
“No Ignition at 12.5 kw/m2 
at 20 minutes”  

With pass criteria                            
“Pass” 

 
OR 
 
vi.   ISO 13785-2                   

With pass criteria                            
“Pass” 

 
 

(All layers including EPS/
XPS, coating, insulation, 
mesh, adhesive and finish.) 
shall be class A (Flame 
spread 0-25, Smoke devel-
opment 0-450) when indi-
vidually tested to                       
ASTM E 84 or UL 723 

 
OR 
 
iv.   NFPA 285                         

With pass criteria                            
“Pass” 

2.  ANY INSTALLATION 

3.  ANY AESTHETICS                               

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 155 of 1348 

 

Table 1.15.b.: EIFS and ETICS on Fire Resistance rated Exterior wall coverings-Test Requirements 

OCCUPANCY AND TYPE OF 

TEST 1 

TEST 2 

BUILDING 

EIFS/ETICS                     

EIFS/ETICS AS                        

COMPONENTS AND         

WALL ASSEMBLY 

PANEL AS  PRODUCT 

1.  ANY BUILDING  

i.  All components of the EIFS 

iii.   ASTM E 119                              

(All layers including 
coating, insulation, mesh, 
adhesive and finish.) shall 
be class A when individual-
ly tested to ASTM E 84 or 
UL 723 

 
AND 
 
ii.    NFPA 268                             

With pass criteria                   
“No Ignition at 12.5 kw/m2 
at 20 minutes”  

With pass criteria                            
“1 Hr or 2 Hr OR 3 Hr as 
per required fire rating of 
the wall. 

 
OR 
 
iv.   UL 263                                            

With pass criteria                            
“1 Hr or 2 Hr OR 3 Hr as 
per required fire rating of 
the wall. 

 
OR 
 
v.   EN 1362-3                                     

With pass criteria                            
“1 Hr or 2 Hr OR 3 Hr as 
per required fire rating of 
the wall. 

 
OR 
 
vi.   EN 1362-4                                     

With pass criteria                            
“1 Hr or 2 Hr OR 3 Hr as 
per required fire rating of 
the wall. 

 
 

2.  ANY INSTALLATION 

3.  ANY AESTHETICS                               

 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 156 of 1348 
4.8. Polycarbonate External Wall and Façade System (PEWFS)  

4.8.1.  Polycarbonate External Wall and Façade System (PEWFS) used on façade and exteri-
or wall assembly shall comply with general requirements of Section 4.5 and the spe-
cific requirements of Section 4.8.   

 
4.8.2. Definition  

 
4.8.2.1.   Polycarbonate is a type of thermoplastic, a polymer that becomes pliable or 
moldable above a specific temperature and returns to a solid state on cool-
ing. Polycarbonate is an engineering thermoplastics. 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 157 of 1348 

 

4.8.3. Specific Requirements  

 
4.8.3.1.  PEWFS shall be certified and listed by a third party independent Testing and 

Certification body, approved by Civil Defence.  

 
4.8.3.2.  PEWFS shall be Marked/labeled to verify its certification mark from accred-

ited certification body. 

 
4.8.3.3.  The entire assembly including ornaments, trims and moldings with intended 

thickness, joints, seams, fasteners and wall arrangement shall be tested in 
accordance with Table 1.16.a.  

 

4.8.4. Test Certifications  

 
4.8.4.1.   PEWFS panels and facade systems on non-fire resistance rated and non 

load bearing exterior wall coverings shall comply with Table 1.16.a. 

 
4.8.4.2.   EIFS and ETICS panels and facade systems on fire resistance rated exterior 

wall assembly coverings shall comply with Table 1.16.b. 

 

4.8.5. Application 

 
4.8.5.1.   The occupancies and type of buildings that are allowed to have PEWFS shall 

be in accordance with Table 1.16.a. and Table 1.16.b.  

 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 158 of 1348 

 
 

Table 1.16.a.: PEWFS on Non-Fire Resistance rated and Non-Load bearing Exterior wall coverings-

Test Requirements 

OCCUPANCY AND TYPE OF 

TEST 1 

TEST 2 

BUILDING 

PEWFS PANEL  AS  

PEWFS AS                        

PRODUCT 

WALL ASSEMBLY 

i.  EN 13501-1                                     
With pass criteria                           
With pass criteria                            
A1 OR A2-s1-d0                                                              
as per BRE 135 

iii.    BS 8414 –1 Or 2                           

 
AND 
 
ii.     ASTM D1929                                  

 
OR 
 
iv.    NFPA 285                         

With pass criteria                   
PEWFS shall have self igni-
tion temperature of not 
less than 3430C 

With pass criteria                            
“Pass” 

 
OR 
 
v.     FM 4881                             

With pass criteria                            
“Pass” 

 
OR 
 
vi.    ISO 13785-2                   

With pass criteria                            
“Pass” 

 

i.  EN 13501-1                                     
With pass criteria                           
B-s1-d0                                                            

With pass criteria                            
as per BRE 135 

iii.    BS 8414 –1 Or 2                           

 
AND 
 
ii.     ASTM D1929                                  

 
OR 
 
iv.    NFPA 285                         

With pass criteria                   
PEWFS shall have self igni-
tion temperature of not 
less than 3430C 

With pass criteria                            
“Pass” 

 
OR 
 
v.     FM 4881                             

With pass criteria                            
“Pass” 

 
OR 
 
vi.    ISO 13785-2                   

With pass criteria                            
“Pass” 

 

1.  SUPER HIGHRISE BUILDING 

2.  HIGHRISE BUILDING  

3.  MALLS 

4.  THEME PARKS 

5.  SCHOOLS 

6.  HOSPITALS 

7.  ASSEMBLY 

8.  LOWRISE BUILDING 

9.  MIDRISE BUILDING  

10.  WAREHOUSE 

11.  INDUSTRIAL 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 159 of 1348 

 

Table 1.16.b.: PEWFS on Fire Resistance rated Exterior wall -Test Requirements 

OCCUPANCY AND TYPE OF 

TEST 1 

TEST 2 

BUILDING 

PEWFS PANEL  AS  

PEWFS IN                        

PRODUCT 

WALL ASSEMBLY 

i.  EN 13501-1                                     
With pass criteria                           
A1 OR A2-s1-d0                                                              

iii.    ASTM E 119                              

With pass criteria                            
“1 Hr or 2 Hr OR 3 Hr as 
per required fire rating of 
the wall. 

 
OR 
 
v.   EN 1362-3                                     

With pass criteria                            
“1 Hr or 2 Hr OR 3 Hr as 
per required fire rating of 
the wall. 

 
OR 
 
vi.  EN 1362-4                                     

With pass criteria                            
“1 Hr or 2 Hr OR 3 Hr as 
per required fire rating of 
the wall. 

 
 

With pass criteria                            
“1 Hr or 2 Hr OR 3 Hr as 
per required fire rating of 
the wall. 

 
AND 
 
 
ii.    ASTM D1929                                  
OR 
 
iv.  UL 263                                            

With pass criteria                   
PEWFS shall have self igni-
tion temperature of not 
less than 3430C  

1.  ANY BUILDING  

2.  ANY INSTALLATION 

3.  ANY AESTHETICS                               

 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 160 of 1348 
4.9. Sandwich Panels  

4.9.1.  Sandwich Panels shall comply with general requirements of Section 4.5, where used 

on façade and exterior wall and the specific requirements of Section 4.9.   

 
4.9.2.  Sandwich Panels used in other applications such as internal partitions, cold storage 

or roofing shall comply with the specific requirements of Section 4.9.   

 
4.9.3.  Sandwich panels shall be tested for the intended applications such as external, inter-
nal, roofing or cold storages and shall not be interchanged in their end applications. 

 
4.9.4. Definition  

 
4.9.4.1.   Sandwich panels are foam plastic insulated sandwich panels (FISP) or mineral 

core insulated panels or self supporting double skin metal faced insulating 
panels. 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 161 of 1348 

 

4.9.4.2.   Generally cores used in the sandwich panels based on their intended appli-

cation are Polyisocyanurate Foam (PIR), Polyurethane Foam (PUR), Expanded 
or Extruded Polystyrene (EPS and EXPS) or Non-combustible mineral wool or 
fiberglass. 

 
4.9.4.3.   Sandwich panels are generally used as external wall systems in low rise 

building such as warehouses and roofing. As internal partitions and ceiling 
applications, sandwich panels are used in, cold storages, food industries, 
warehouses and industries. 

 

4.9.5. Specific Requirements  

 
4.9.5.1.   Where Sandwich panels are installed on the exterior walls, they shall not 

reduce the fire resistance rating of the wall. 

 
4.9.5.2.   Sandwich panels shall be Marked/labeled to verify its certification mark 

from accredited certification laboratory with its intended end use and appli-
cation (Such as Internal wall, External wall, cold storage, roofing etc.), in 
compliance with this code.  

4.9.5.3.   Sandwich panels installed as exterior walls shall be completely separated 
from the building interior and plenum by a thermal barrier, complying to 
test standards of Section 7.1.11. of this chapter.  

 
4.9.5.4.   Thermal barrier shall not be required in masonry or concrete wall, floor or 

roof constructions where the sandwich panel is covered on each face by 
concrete or masonry with a minimum thickness of 25 mm.  

 
4.9.5.5.   Thermal barrier shall not be required in fully Sprinkler protected cooler or 
freezer or cold rooms and the rooms they are located in, when sandwich 
panel is minimum 4 inch thick and has Class A rating as per UL 723 or ASTM 
E 84 (FSI-25, SDI-450 or less), when tested both core and panel. Moreover, 
sandwich panel shall have self ignition temperature, not less than 4270C in 
accordance with ASTM D 1929. 

 
4.9.5.6.   Thermal barrier shall not be required in roof assemblies where sandwich 
panels are separated from the interior of the building by wood structural 
sheathing not less than 12 mm in thickness. And the sandwich panel is part 
of roof covering assembly tested and passes with FM 4450 or UL 1256 or 
FM 4471.  

 
4.9.5.7.   Foam plastic insulation, exterior facings an coatings shall be tested sepa-

rately in the thickness of intended use as per Table 1.17.c. 

 

 

 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 162 of 1348 

 

4.9.6. Test Certifications  

 
4.9.6.1.   Sandwich panels shall be permitted to be installed as exterior walls when 

tested in accordance with Table 1.17.a.  

 
4.9.6.2.   Sandwich panels as fire resistance rated exterior wall assembly coverings 

shall comply with both Table 1.17.a. and Table 1.17.b. 

 
4.9.6.3.   Sandwich panels used in applications other than as exterior walls shall com-

ply with test requirements in accordance with Table 1.17.c. 

 

4.9.7. Application 

 
4.9.7.1.   The occupancies and type of buildings that are allowed to have sandwich 

panels in their exterior wall facades shall be in accordance with Table 
1.17.a. and Table 1.17.b.  

 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 163 of 1348 

 

Table 1.17.a.: Sandwich Panels on Non-Fire Resistance rated and Non-Load bearing Exterior wall 

coverings-Test Requirements 

OCCUPANCY AND TYPE OF 

TEST 1 

TEST 2 

BUILDING 

SANDWICH PANEL  AS  

SANDWICH PANEL IN                        

PRODUCT 

WALL ASSEMBLY 

1.  SUPER HIGHRISE BUILDING 

i.     Core shall be tested to the  

v.     BS 8414 –1 Or 2                           

2.  HIGHRISE BUILDING  

3.  MALLS 

4.  THEME PARKS 

5.  SCHOOLS 

6.  HOSPITALS 

7.  ASSEMBLY 

criteria iii and iv. 

ii.     Panel shall be tested with 
the thickness intended to 
the criteria iii and iv. 

With pass criteria                            
as per BRE 135 

 
OR 
 
vi.    NFPA 285                         

 
iii.     EN 13501-1                                     
With pass criteria                           
A OR A2-s1-d0                                                             

With pass criteria                            
“Pass” 

 
AND 
 
iv.    ASTM D1929                                  

 
OR 
 
vii.   FM 4881                             

With pass criteria                            
“Class 1” 

With pass criteria                   
PEWFS shall have self igni-
 
tion temperature of not 
OR 
less than 3430C. 
 
viii.   ISO 13785-2                   

8.  LOWRISE BUILDING 

i.     Core shall be tested to the  

vi.     BS 8414 –1 Or 2                           

With pass criteria                            
“Pass” 

9.  MIDRISE BUILDING  

10.  WAREHOUSE  

11.  INDUSTRIAL 

 

 

criteria iii or iv and v. 

ii.     Panel shall be tested with 
the thickness intended to 
the criteria iii or iv and v. 

With pass criteria                            
as per BRE 135 

 
OR 
 
vii.    NFPA 285                         

With pass criteria                            
“Pass” 

 
 
iii.     EN 13501-1                                     
With pass criteria                           
 
B-s1-d0                                                              
OR 
 
viii.   FM 4881                             

 
OR    
 
iv.    FM 4880                                

With pass criteria                            
“Class 1” 

With pass criteria                   
 
“Non-combustible core”  
OR 
 
ix.   ISO 13785-2                   

 
AND 
 
v.    ASTM D1929                                  

With pass criteria                            
“Pass” 

Shall have self ignition 
temperature of not less 
than 3430C. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 164 of 1348 

 

Table 1.17.b.: Sandwich Panel on Fire Resistance rated Exterior wall -Test Requirements 

OCCUPANCY AND TYPE OF 

TEST 1 

TEST 2 

BUILDING 

SANDWICH PANEL  AS  

SANDWICH PANEL IN                        

PRODUCT 

WALL ASSEMBLY 

1.  ANY BUILDING WITH ANY HEIGHT 

i.      Core shall be tested to the  

vi.    ASTM E 119                              

AND ANY OCCUPANCY                               

criteria iii or iv and v. 

(SHALL BE TESTED FOR THE                    

THICKNESS INTENDED TO BE USED)                        

ii.     Panel shall be tested with 
the thickness intended to 
the criteria iii or iv and v. 

With pass criteria                            
“1 Hr or 2 Hr OR 3 Hr as 
per required fire rating of 
the wall. 

 
OR 
 
ix.  EN 1362-4                                     

With pass criteria                            
“1 Hr or 2 Hr OR 3 Hr as 
per required fire rating of 
the wall. 

 
 

With pass criteria                            
“1 Hr or 2 Hr OR 3 Hr as 
per required fire rating of 
the wall. 

 
 
iii.     EN 13501-1                                     
With pass criteria                           
A OR A2-s1-d0                                                             

 
OR 
 
vii.   UL 263                                            
With pass criteria                            
“1 Hr or 2 Hr OR 3 Hr as 
per required fire rating of 
the wall. 

 
OR    
 
iv.    FM 4880                                

 
OR 
With pass criteria                   
 
“Non-combustible core”  
viii.  EN 1362-3                                     

 
AND 
 
v.    ASTM D1929                                  

Shall have self ignition 
temperature of not less 
than 3430C. 

 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 165 of 1348 

 

Table 1.17.c.: Sandwich Panel in various applications -Test Requirements 

APPLICATIONS 

TEST 1 

TEST 2 

SANDWICH PANEL AS  

SANDWICH PANEL IN                        

PRODUCT 

WALL ASSEMBLY 

1.  INTERNAL NON FIRE RESISTANCE 

RATED WALLS AND PARTITIONS                    

i.  EN 13501-1                                     
With pass criteria                           
B-d0-S1                                                              

NOT REQUIRED 
 
 

(SHALL BE TESTED FOR THE                    

THICKNESS INTENDED TO BE USED)                        

OR  
   
i.  ASTM E 84/ UL 723                             

 

 

2.  INTERNAL FIRE RESISTANCE     

With pass criteria                   
“Class A”  

OR    
 
i.  BS 476 Part 7                       

With pass criteria                   
“Class 1”  

OR    
 
i.  FM 4880                                

With pass criteria                   
“Non-combustible core”  

 
AND 
 
i.  ASTM D1929                                  

Shall have self ignition 
temperature of not less 
than 3430C.  

RATED WALLS AND PARTITIONS                    

i.  EN 13501-1                                     
iv.  FM 4881                                            
With pass criteria                           
With pass criteria                            
B-d0-S1                                                              
“Class 1” 

(SHALL BE TESTED FOR THE                    

THICKNESS INTENDED TO BE USED)                        

 
OR    
 
ii.    FM 4880                                

With pass criteria                   
“Non-combustible core”  

OR 
 
v.   UL 1715                           

With pass criteria                            
“1 Hr or 2 Hr OR 3 Hr as 
per required fire rating of 
the wall. 

 
AND 
 
iii.   ASTM D1929                                  

OR 
 
vi.  UL 1040                                       

Shall have self ignition 
temperature of not less 
than 3430C.  

With pass criteria                            
“1 Hr or 2 Hr OR 3 Hr as 
per required fire rating of 
the wall. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 166 of 1348 

 

Table 1.17.c.: Sandwich Panel in various applications -Test Requirements 

APPLICATIONS 

TEST 1 

TEST 2 

SANDWICH PANEL AS  

SANDWICH PANEL IN                        

PRODUCT 

WALL ASSEMBLY 

i.  EN 13501-1                                     
With pass criteria                           
B-d0-S1                                                              

NOT REQUIRED 
 
 

 
OR    
 
ii.    FM 4880                                

With pass criteria                   
“Non-combustible core”  

 
AND 
 
iii.   ASTM D1929                                  

Shall have self ignition 
temperature of not less 
than 3430C.  

3.  COLD STORAGE WALLS  

(SHALL BE TESTED FOR THE                    

THICKNESS INTENDED TO BE USED)                        

 

 

4.  ROOFING-SPRINKLERED             

i.  ASTM D1929                                  

ii.    NFPA 256                                      

BUILDINGS  

(SHALL BE TESTED FOR THE                    

Shall have self ignition 
temperature of not less 
than 3430C.  

THICKNESS INTENDED TO BE USED)                        

With pass criteria                            
“Class B” 

OR 
 
iii.   ASTM E 108                                            

With pass criteria                            
“Class B” 

OR 
 
iv.  EN 13501-5 +A1                           

With pass criteria                            
“Class Broof t4”. 

OR 
 
v.   UL 790                                       

With pass criteria                            
“Class B” 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 167 of 1348 

 

Table 1.17.c.: Sandwich Panel in various applications -Test Requirements 

APPLICATIONS 

TEST 1 

TEST 2 

SANDWICH PANEL AS  

SANDWICH PANEL IN                        

PRODUCT 

WALL ASSEMBLY 

5.  ROOFING-NON SPRINKLERED             

i.  ASTM D1929                                  

ii.     NFPA 276                                      

BUILDINGS  

(SHALL BE TESTED FOR THE                    

Shall have self ignition 
temperature of not less 
than 3430C.  

THICKNESS INTENDED TO BE USED)                        

With pass criteria                            
“Class 1” 

OR 
 
Iii. ASTM E 108                                            

With pass criteria                            
“Class A” 

 
OR 
 
Iv. EN 13501-5 +A1                           

With pass criteria                            
“Class Broof t4”. 

 
OR 
 
v. UL 790                                       

With pass criteria                            
“Class A” 

 
OR 
 
vi. FM 4470 Or FM 4471                                       

With pass criteria                            
“Pass” 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 168 of 1348 
4.10. GRC/GRFC and GRP Systems  

4.10.1.  GRP/GRFC and GRP systems shall comply with general requirements of Section 4.5, 

where used on façade and exterior wall and the specific requirements of  Section 
4.10.    

 
4.10.2.  GRP/GRFC and GRP systems  may be used in a variety of building exterior envelope 
and Façade systems, many of which may be project based and of a specific design. 
However Manufacturers, Consultants, Design Teams, Contractors and Testing labor-
atories must ensure that these systems comply in the first instance with the Reac-
tion to Fire, Surface Spread of Flame and Resistance to Fire performance require-
ments and intent of the UAE Fire and Life Safety Code of Practice. This also includes 
selection of non-combustible formers, appropriate Fire Stopping and buildability of 
the tested system against the field application.  

 
 
4.10.3. Definition  

 

4.10.3.1.  Glass fiber reinforced concrete or GFRC is a type of fiber-reinforced concrete. The 

product is also known as glass fiber reinforced concrete  or GRC. Glass fiber con-
cretes are mainly used in exterior building façade panels and as architectural pre-
cast concrete. 

 

 
 

 
 
 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 169 of 1348 

4.10.3.2.   Glass-reinforced plastic (GRP), also known as glass fibre reinforced plastic (GRFP)

is a fibre reinforced polymer made of a plastic matrix reinforced with Glass Fi-
bres. 

4.10.4. Specific Requirements  
 
4.10.4.1.   GRP(GRFP) shall be constructed such that it meets the performance  char-

acteristics required as per ASTM D3841. 

 
4.10.4.2.   GRC/GRFC and GRP systems  shall be certified and listed by a third party 
independent  testing and Certification body, approved by Civil Defence. 

 
4.10.4.3.   GRC/GRFC and GRP systems  shall be Marked/labeled to verify its certification 

mark from  accredited certification laboratory. 

 
4.10.4.4.   The Base layers and core materials shall be tested separately and entire as-
sembly including ornaments, trims and moldings’ with intended thickness, 
joints, seams, fasteners and wall arrangement shall be tested in accordance 
with Table 1.18.a. 

 
4.10.4.5.   Where GRC/GRFC and GRP systems  are installed on Fire rated or load 
bearing walls, the wall  arrangement shall be tested in accordance with 
Table 1.18.b. 

4.10.4.6.   Reaction to Fire Testing of GRC/GRFS/GRP Products to EN13501-1 MUST in-
clude EN 13823 and EN ISO 11925 testing as a panel with the thickness and 
form of intended use, including consideration of air space behind the formed 
panel. Mounting on non-combustible substrates for the EN ISO 11925 test is 
not appropriate should the intended use not be reflected during reaction to 
fire testing. 

 
 

4.10.5. Test Certification  
 
4.10.5.1.   GRC/GRFC and GRP panels and facade systems on non-fire resistance rated 

and  non load bearing exterior wall coverings shall comply with Table 1.18.a. 

 
4.10.5.2.   GRC/GRFC and GRP panels and facade systems on fire resistance rated exteri-

or  wall assembly coverings shall comply with Table 1.18b. 

 
 

4.10.6. Application  
 
4.10.6.1.   The occupancies and type of buildings that are allowed to have GRC/GRFC 

and GRP shall be in accordance with Table 1.18.a. and Table 1.18.b.  

 

 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 170 of 1348 

 

Table 1.18.a.: GRC/ GRFC and GRP Panels on Non-Fire Resistance rated and Non-Load bearing 

Exterior wall coverings-Test Requirements 

OCCUPANCY AND TYPE OF 

TEST 1 

TEST 2 

BUILDING 

GRC/ GRFC/ GRP AS  

GRC/ GRFC/ GRP AS 

PRODUCT 

WALL ASSEMBLY 

i.     EN 13501-1                                     
With pass criteria                           
With pass criteria                            
A OR A2-s1-d0                                                             
as per BRE 135 

vi.     BS 8414 –1 Or 2                           

 
WITH 
 
ii.    EN 13823 
 
AND 
 
iii.  EN ISO 11925 
 
AND 
 
iv.    ASTM D1929                                  

 
OR 
 
vii.   FM 4881                             

With pass criteria                            
“Pass” 

 
OR 
 
viii.   ISO 13785-2                   

With pass criteria                            
“Pass” 

Shall have self ignition 
temperature of not less 
than 3430C. 

 
OR 
 
v.     ASTM D3841 for GRP only 

with category CC1                                  

i.      EN 13501-1                                     
With pass criteria                           
B-s1-d0                                                              

With pass criteria                            
as per BRE 135 

iv.     BS 8414 –1 Or 2                           

 
OR    
 
ii.     ASTM D1929                                  

 
OR 
 
v.     FM 4881                             

Shall have self ignition 
temperature of not less 
than 3430C. 

 
OR 
 
iii.     ASTM D3841 for GRP only 

With pass criteria                            
“Pass” 

 
OR 
 
ix.   ISO 13785-2                   

With pass criteria                            
“Pass” 

with category CC2                                  

1.  SUPER HIGHRISE BUILDING 

2.  HIGHRISE BUILDING  

3.  MALLS 

4.  THEME PARKS 

5.  SCHOOLS 

6.  HOSPITALS 

7.  ASSEMBLY 

8.  LOWRISE BUILDING 

9.  MIDRISE BUILDING  

10.  WAREHOUSE  

11.  INDUSTRIAL 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 171 of 1348i.     EN 13501-1                                     
With pass criteria                           
A OR A2-s1-d0                                                             

vi.     ASTM E 119                          
With pass criteria “1 Hr or 
2 Hr or 3 Hr as per re-
quired fire ratings of the 
wall. 

 
OR 
 
vii.   UL 263                            

 
WITH 
 
ii.    EN 13823 
 
AND 
 
iii.  EN ISO 11925 
 
AND 
 
 
iv.    ASTM D1929                                  
OR 
 
viii.   EN 1362-3                     

With pass criteria “1 Hr or 
2 Hr or 3 Hr as per re-
quired fire ratings of the 
wall.                                   

With pass criteria “1 Hr or 
2 Hr or 3 Hr as per re-
quired fire ratings of the 
wall.               

 
OR 
 
ix.   EN 1362-4                      

Shall have self ignition 
temperature of not less 
than 3430C. 

 
OR 
 
v.     ASTM D3841 for GRP only 

with category CC1                                  

With pass criteria “1 Hr or 
2 Hr or 3 Hr as per re-
quired fire ratings of the 
wall.                                   

                     

 

 

 

Table 1.18.b.: GRC/ GRFC and GRP Panels on Fire Resistance rated and Non-Load bearing Exterior 

wall coverings-Test Requirements 

OCCUPANCY AND TYPE OF 

TEST 1 

TEST 2 

BUILDING 

GRC/ GRFC/ GRP AS  

GRC/ GRFC/ GRP AS 

PRODUCT 

WALL ASSEMBLY 

1.  ANY BUILDING 

2.  ANY INSTALLATION 

3.  ANY AESTHETICS 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 172 of 1348 

5.   Glazing Systems 

 

5.1.  Intention 

5.1.1. 

5.1.2. 

The  provisions of  this  document shall  specify the minimum  requirements  for  the 
certification and listing, design, installation, inspection and maintenance of glazing 
systems to achieve acceptable levels of Fire resistance, Reaction to fire,  Perime-
ter fire protection, Safety of people from impact with glass.  

The weather protection of buildings is not within the scope or intention of this sec-
tion.  Weather  protection  aspect  to  buildings,  such  as  protection  from  wind  and 
water,  seismic  pressure  etc.,  shall  comply  with  Municipality  regulations  and  re-
quirements. 

5.1.3. 

The intention of this section is to ensure that flame spread on exterior glazed fa-
çade, or glazed room radiation or radiation from glazed fire doors is restricted to 
ensure safety of people. 

5.2.  Applications of Glazing Systems where glazing is specified 

as part of fire compartmentation 

 

 

 

Photo Caption 
 

Figure 1.20.: Glazing Applications in a building 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 173 of 1348 

5.3.  Glazing Testing and Acceptance 

5.3.1. 

The  requirement  for  fire  rated  glazing  in  any  building  shall  be  based  on  the  Civil 
Defence  approved  Fire  and  Life  Safety  Drawings  and  strategy  for  the  building, 
which identifies the following.  

a. 

b. 

 The type of Fire resistance  required  according  to  EN  standards  or  Fire  re-
sistance rating & Fire protection rating according to American standards.  

 The duration of fire resistance required (30 min, 45 min, 60 min, 90 min, 120 
min etc.) 

c. 

 Whether the glazing should be ‘integrity’ only or ‘integrity and insulation’. 

 

5.3.2. 

The  Glazing  shall  comply with  the  relevant  general requirements  of  Section  4.5., 

Table 1.18: Glazing Test requirements. 

TEST A 

TEST B 

WHERE FIRE RESISTANCE RATING 
IS REQUIRED 

SAFETY GLAZING TESTS 
(Resistance to impact either without 
breaking, or breaking in way such 
that persons may not sustain pierc-
ing or cutting injuries.) 

TESTED WITH ANY OF THE FOLLOWING, 
WHERE FIRE RESISTANCE RATING IS        
REQUIRED 
 
Pass as assembly with NFPA 251  
Pass as assembly with EN 1364-3 
Pass as assembly with UL 263 
Pass as assembly with ASTM E119 

TESTED WITH ANY OF THE FOLLOWING, 
WHERE FIRE RESISTANCE RATING IS        
REQUIRED 
 
 
Pass as assembly with EN 1364-1 
Pass as assembly with NFPA 251 
Pass as assembly with UL 263 
Pass as assembly with ASTM E119 

TESTED WITH ANY OF THE FOLLOWING, 
WHERE FIRE RESISTANCE RATING IS        
REQUIRED 
 
Pass as assembly with EN 1364-2 
Pass as assembly with NFPA 251 
Pass as assembly with UL 263 
Pass as assembly with ASTM E119 

TESTED WITH ANY OF THE FOLLOWING, 
WHERE FIRE RESISTANCE RATING IS        
REQUIRED 
 
Pass as assembly with EN 1365-2 
Pass as assembly with NFPA 251 
Pass as assembly with UL 263 
Pass as assembly with ASTM E119 

EN 12600  
OR 
ANY OF THE FOLLOWING 
 
ANSI Z97.1, A FOR < 0.9 m2 ,  
B FOR > 0.9 m2 
CPSC 16 CR 1202, I FOR < 0.9 m2 ,  
II FOR > 0.9 m2 

EN 12600  
OR 
ANY OF THE FOLLOWING 
 
ANSI Z97.1, A FOR < 0.9 m2 ,  
B FOR > 0.9 m2 
CPSC 16 CR 1202, I FOR < 0.9 m2 ,  
II FOR > 0.9 m2 

EN 12600  
OR 
ANY OF THE FOLLOWING 
 
ANSI Z97.1, A FOR < 0.9 m2 ,  
B FOR > 0.9 m2 
CPSC 16 CR 1202, I FOR < 0.9 M2 ,  
II FOR > 0.9 m2 

EN 12600  
OR 
ANY OF THE FOLLOWING 
 
ANSI Z97.1, A FOR < 0.9 m2 ,  
B FOR > 0.9 m2 
CPSC 16 CR 1202, I FOR < 0.9 m2 ,  
II FOR > 0.9 m2 

GLAZING APPLICATION IN 
THE BUILDING 

1. NON LOAD BEARING  
    CURTAINWALL WITH  
   GLAZING,  

2. NON LOAD BEARING  

WALLS 

3. CEILING 

Photo Caption 
 

4. LOAD BEARING  
   ELEMENTS                    

(FLOOR AND ROOF) 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 174 of 1348 

 

GLAZING APPLICATION IN 
THE BUILDING 

 

Table 1.18: Glazing Test requirements. 

TEST A 

TEST B 

SAFETY GLAZING TESTS 
(Resistance to impact either without 
breaking, or breaking in way such 
that persons may not sustain pierc-
ing or cutting injuries.) 

EN 12600  
OR 
ANY OF THE FOLLOWING 
 
ANSI Z97.1, A FOR < 0.9 m2 ,  
B FOR > 0.9 m2 
CPSC 16 CR 1202, I FOR < 0.9 m2 ,  
II FOR > 0.9 m2 

EN 12600  
OR 
ANY OF THE FOLLOWING 
 
ANSI Z97.1, A FOR < 0.9 m2 ,  
B FOR > 0.9 m2 
CPSC 16 CR 1202, I FOR < 0.9 m2 ,  
II FOR > 0.9 m2 

EN 14428  
AND  
Also shall comply with safety glass re-
quirements of Section 5.4.2. 

5. DOORS AND VISION  
   PANELS 

6. WINDOWS 

TESTED WITH ANY OF THE FOLLOWING, 
WHERE FIRE RESISTANCE RATING IS        
REQUIRED 
 
Pass as assembly with UL 10 C 
Pass as assembly with NFPA 252 
Pass as assembly with EN 1634-1 
Pass as assembly with BS 476 Part 22. 

TESTED WITH ANY OF THE FOLLOWING, 
WHERE FIRE RESISTANCE RATING IS        
REQUIRED 
 
Pass as assembly with UL 9 
Pass as assembly with NFPA 257 
Pass as assembly with EN 1634-1:2014 

7. BATHING/SHOWER                     

No Requirements 

ENCLOSURE/SCREEN/ 
SWIMMING/ WET AREAS 
(SLIP RISK) 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 175 of 1348 
5.4.  Design, Installation, Inspection & Maintenance 
 

5.4.1. 

Fire Resistant Glazing - Design / Specification 

 5.4.1.1.  Fire resistant glazing systems shall be designed by a specialist manufac-

turer. 

 5.4.1.2. 

It  is  the  consultant’s  responsibility  to  ensure  that  qualified  glazing  spe-
cialist is involved in the design, in full compliance with this code.  

 5.4.1.3. 

In addition to the fire strategy Approved by Civil Defence, the following 
points shall be addressed by the glazing installer to ensure they are con-
sistent with the fire strategy and overall intent of the proposed glazing 
system: 

 

a.  The minimum fire rating specified relates to a full system of compo-
nents. All elements of the fire barrier being created must  collectively 
provide the performance required as part of a fire resistant assembly. 
b.  The final glazing system installed must be the same as the system that 
has  been  tested  in  accordance  with  the  Civil  Defence  requirements. 
Project-specific differences should be discussed with the manufactur-
er and system certifier. 

c.  The  system  selected  must  be  capable  of  performing  in  the  environ-
ment  in which  it  is  intended  to  be  installed,  in  particular  internal or 
external environments. 

d.  The impact-resistance of the glazing has to be met as specified by the 

impact rating as per Table 1.18. 

e.  For  unidirectional  systems,  the  direction  of  the  fire-side  should  be 
labeled  and  easily  identifiable  on  the  glass,  profiles  or  accessories. 
Where the direction of fire is not known, only bi-directional fire-rated 
glazing components should be used. 

f.  Fire-rated glazing in inclined and horizontal applications shall be test-
ed  and  approved  separately  to  fire  rated  glazing  in  vertical  applica-
tions.  Vertically  tested  systems  cannot  be  assumed  to  work  in  hori-
zontal or inclined glazing applications. 

g.  The  specified  system  should  have  a  label  with  scope  based  on  the 
type of fire represented during the fire test of the system (For exam-
ple, a fire resistant system tested for domestic fires may not sustain 
conditions of industrial fires). 

h.  Considerations for the glazing system design shall include but not be 
limited  to  the  overall  screen  size,  fenestration  layout  within  the 
screen,  materials  used  in  construction  of  the  profile  (such  as  the 
gauge,  quality, thickness, finish,  etc.)  and  the  amount  of edge  cover 
and edge clearance. 

i.  Standard impact safety toughened or safety / security laminated glass 
is not  necessarily fire-rated and the same cannot be used without  it 
being tested and approved. 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 176 of 1348 

5.4.2. 

Safety Glazing - Design / Specification 

 5.4.2.1. 

 

The Safety Glazing is required in critical locations (2,3,4,5,6,7,8 and 11) 
described in doors, side panels and low level glazing as shown in the 
Figure 1.21 and 1.22. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Figure 1.21.: Safety Glazing at Door and adjacent areas 

Figure 1.22.: Safety Glazing at Windows 

5.4.2.2.  Minimum classification Requirements of safety glass or safety plastics 

to be used in critical locations (Such as Gymnasiums, places of energetic 
activities, play areas etc.,) shall be as per Table 1.19. 

 
5.4.2.3.  Where glazing is only accessible from one side (3.a, 4.a), the testing and 

classification can be from only that side. 

 

Table 1.19: Minimum Classification for Safety Glazing requirements. 

CRITICAL LOCATION 

GLAZING PANE DIMENSION 
 

SAFETY GLASS 
 
 

SAFETY PLASTICS 

1. DOORS 

 

2. DOOR SIDE PANEL 

 

3. FULLY BACKED MIRROR  
GLAZING (A) 

 

Photo Caption 
 

4. UNBACKED MIRROR                      
GLAZING (A) 

 

> 900 mm 

≤ 900 mm 

> 900 mm 

≤ 900 mm 

> 900 mm 

≤ 900 mm 

> 900 mm 

≤ 900 mm 

2(β)Φ 

3(β)Φ 

2(β)Φ 

3(β)Φ 

2(β)Φ 

3(β)Φ 

2(β)Φ 

3(β)Φ 

5. LOW LEVEL AREAS 

Irrespective of pane dimensions  3(β)Φ 

6. BATHING AREAS 

Irrespective of pane dimensions  3(β)Φ 

7. AREAS OF SPECIAL RISK 

Irrespective of pane dimensions  3(β)Φ 

 

Class B 

Class C 

Class B 

Class C 

Class B 

Class C 

Class Bo 

Class Co 

Class C 

Class C 

Class C 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 177 of 1348 

 

 
5.4.2.4. 

 

Glass Safety classification as per EN 12600 shall be as per Table 1.20. 
and Table 1.21. 

Table 1.20: Glass Classification as per EN 12600. 

PVB LAMINATED 
GLASS CODE 

PVB FILM THICKNESS 
 

GLASS THICKNESS 
 
 

CLASS AS PER  
EN 12600 

33.1 

44.1  

55.1 

33.2 

44.2 

44.4 

44.6 

55.2 

66.2 

88.2 

0.38 mm 

0.38 mm 

0.38 mm 

0.76 mm 

0.76 mm 

1.52 mm 

2.28 mm 

0.76 mm 

0.76 mm 

0.76 mm 

6.4 mm 

8.4 mm 

10.4 mm 

6.8 mm 

8.8 mm 

9.5 mm 

10.3 mm 

10.8 mm 

12.8 mm 

16.8 mm 

2(B)2 

2(B)2 

1(B)1 

1(B)1 

1(B)1 

1(B)1 

1(B)1 

1(B)1 

1(B)1 

1(B)1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Table 1.21: Tempered Glass Classification as per EN 12600. 

THICKNESS OF 
TEMPERED GLASS 

MINIMUM REQUIRED CLASSIFICATION AS PER 
EN 12600 

4 mm 

6 mm 

8 mm 

10 mm 

12 mm 

1(C)2 

1(C)2 

1(C)2 

1(C)1 

1(C)1 

5.4.3. 

Labeling / Manifestation 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Under some conditions of lighting, large areas of transparent glazing 
used to subdivide a building might not be readily apparent. The risk of 
human impact with this glazing is greatest if adjacent areas within or 
immediately outside the building are at the same level so that a person 
might reasonably assume unimpeded passage from one part to anoth-
er. 
 
If the presence of such glazing is not sufficiently well indicated by mulli-
ons, transoms, door frames, large door handles, stall risers or other 
components of the glazing system, it shall be made apparent by some 
form of manifestation. 

5.4.3.1. 

5.4.3.2. 

 
 
 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 178 of 1348 

5.4.3.3.  The manifestation employed should be of a sufficient size to make it im-

mediately obvious. 

5.4.3.4. 

It shall take the form of broken or solid lines, patterns or company logos 
or similar, positioned between 600 mm and 1500 mm above floor level 
at appropriate horizontal intervals. The manifestation should preferably 
be  permanent,  e.g.  etching  of  the  glazing,  but  alternatively,  if  applied 
materials are used they should be durable and not easily removed. 

5.4.4.  Overhead glazing 

 

5.4.4.1.  Glass  used  in  overhead  glazing  shall  be  required  to  remain  in  position 

post-breakage. 

5.4.4.2.  Overhead  glazing  shall  be  laminated  and  include  a  post-breakage  con-
tainment system, such that if the glass breaks the glass is held in place 
until it can be replaced. 

5.4.4.3.  Broken glass shall be replaced promptly. 

5.4.4.4.  Examples of post-breakage containment systems are: 

 

a.  Silicone structural adhesives 
b.  Mechanically fixed batten bars 
c.  Adhesively fixed batten bars 
d.  Polyester and acrylic foam tapes 
e.  Structural washers 
f.  Adhesive-backed  polymeric  film  applied  to  glass  in  conjunction  with 

one of the retention systems listed above. 

 
Injury from objects falling through the glass are not considered in these 
requirements. A specific risk assessment should be conducted to evalu-
ate this. However, consideration at design stage may enable selection of 
suitable glazing materials / measures to mitigate this situation.  

5.4.4.5. 

5.4.4.6.  This section does not consider the risk of injury to persons who may fall 

onto the non-vertical (sloping) overhead glazing. 

5.4.4.7.  CWCT  TN66  shall  be  used to  evaluate  the  safety  and  fragility  of  glazed 

roofing. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 179 of 13485.4.5.  Glass Floors and Staircases 

 

5.4.5.1.  The use of glass in floors or staircases shall be limited to pedestrian foot 
traffic  only.  (see  GGF  data  sheet  7.3:  Guidelines  for  the  use  of  glass  in 
floors and stairs) 
 

5.4.5.2.  For the specification of the design floor loads for the specific use of the 

building the following standard shall be used. 
 
a.  EN  1991-1-1:  2002:  Eurocode  1  –Actions  on  structures  –General  ac-

tions –densities, self-weight, imposed loads for buildings. 

 
b.  Glass  required  to  be  walkable  shall  be  designed  in  accordance  with 
CWCT TN66 using the following standard in relation to the danger of 
slippage and minimum coefficients of friction. Slip resistance shall not 
depend on the use of specialized footwear.  

 
c.  BS 5395-1: 2010 Stairs. Code of practice for the design of stairs with 

straight flights and winders.  

 

5.4.5.3.  The strength of the supports shall be calculated by a competent structur-
al  engineer,  with the  deflection  of the  frame  limited  to  an  appropriate 
value for the glass type.  
 

5.4.5.4.  Consideration shall be given to the complete design process. The follow-
ing list comprises a number of topics that shall be considered alongside 
the regulatory requirements. The list is not exhaustive but relates to the 
common considerations: 

 

a.  Imposed loadings from design code 
b.  Surface finish 
c.  Strength of supporting glazing system 
d.  Impact by falling or thrown objects 
e.  Exposure to solar radiation and water 
f.  Post-fracture behavior 
g.  Deflection 

 

5.4.5.5.  A risk analysis shall be based on the following: 

 

a.  Frequency of use 
b.  Potential for exposure to water and slipping 
c.  Potential for glazing breakage from impacts 
d.  Consequences  of  glazing  failure,  i.e.  Post-breakage  behavior  of  the 

glazing material. 

 

5.4.5.6.  The  ability  of  a  broken  pane  to  remain  in  situ  is  dependent  upon  the 
loads being applied, the glass type, the temperature, the number of frac-
tured plies and the type of interlayer considered in the construction. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 180 of 13485.4.6. 

Installation  

5.4.6.1.  The installation shall be carried out by an Civil Defence and Municipality 
approved installer or fabricator as per system manufacturer's installation 
instructions and shall comply with local regulations and the construction 
documents. 

 
Installer Qualification 

5.4.7. 

5.4.7.1. 

Installer  and  fabricator  specializing  in  Glazing  system  installation  and 
certified  by  the  system  manufacturer  shall  be  listed  with  Municipality 
and Civil Defence Authority.  

 
5.4.7.2.  The  installer  and  fabricator  license  shall  be  based  on  the  training  and 
certification by the system manufacturer to install manufacturer’s prod-
ucts as per specified listed system requirements. 

 

5.4.8. 
 

Inspection 

5.4.8.1.  Special  inspection  shall  be  required  for  all  Glazing  system.    Inspection 

shall take place in successive stages as installation progresses. 

 
5.4.8.2.  The manufacturer’s guidelines shall be available to and used by the glaz-

ing specialist. 

 
5.4.8.3. 

 
5.4.8.4. 

It  is  consultant’s  responsibility  to  recruit  qualified  glazing  specialists  to 
inspect  the  glazing  systems  or  to  hire  the  services  of  Civil  Defence  ap-
proved house of expertise. 

It is consultant’s responsibility to ensure that installer’s work is inspect-
ed during construction and installation at each stage. 

 
5.4.8.5.  Consultant or Civil Defence approved house of expertise undertaking glaz-

ing inspections shall have the following qualifications.  

a.  Accredited  to  ISO/IEC 17020 or  relevant  IAS criteria or  ICC  specialist 
training and certification or equivalent international criteria accepta-
ble to Municipality and Civil Defence. 

b.  2 glazing specialists, qualified as per Section 5.4.9.  
c.  3  years  experience  in  fire  and  life  safety  aspect  of  glazing  systems’ 

inspections.  

 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 181 of 13485.4.9.  Glazing Specialist Qualification 

 
5.4.9.1.  The  glazing  specialists  of  consultant’s  in-house  team  or  Manufacturer’s 
representative or Civil Defence approved house of expertise, undertaking 
design, consultancy, inspection shall have the following qualifications. 

 

a.  Bachelor’s degree in engineering  
b.  5 years experience in glazing systems design and inspections 
c.  Training and certifications by the glazing system manufacturers. 

 
5.4.9.2.  The glazing specialists from consultants or manufacturers or house of ex-
pertise  shall  be  registered  and  licensed  by  Civil  Defence  based  on  their 
qualifications as required by Section 5.4.9.1. and written examination.  

 

5.4.10.  Civil Defence Acceptance of the installation 
 

5.4.10.1. The main consultant and his hired façade consultant or house of expertise 
shall  be  responsible  for  the  glazing  design  specifications,  material  selec-
tion, fabricator selection, initiation of laboratory tests, verification of test 
results, progressive inspection during construction and commissioning.  

 
5.4.10.2. The  main  consultant,  the  Glazing  system  manufacturer,  glazing  system 
installer, glazing system fabricator, glazing specialist and the house of ex-
pertise  shall  jointly  sign  off  the  installation  and  provide  final  inspection 
report for Civil Defence’ acceptance as evidence of compliance.  

 
5.4.11.  Civil Defence registration of the glazing 
 

5.4.11.1. The glazing processor shall be responsible for glazing tests as required by 
Table  1.18.,  TEST  B.,  Safety  and  impact  tests.  The  glazing  processor 
shall be registered with Civil Defence along with his tested materials. 

 
5.4.11.2. The glazing fabricator shall be responsible for glazing tests as required by 
Table 1.18., TEST A., Fire rating of the glazing assembly.  The glazing 
fabricator shall be registered with Civil Defence along with his tested as-
semblies. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 182 of 1348 

6.   Roofing Systems 

 

6.1.  Intention 

6.1.1. 

6.1.2. 

The  provisions of  this  document shall  specify the minimum  requirements  for  the 
certification and listing, design, installation, inspection and maintenance of Roofing 
System to achieve acceptable levels of Fire safety of buildings. 

The  weather  protection of  buildings  is  not  the  scope  or  intention  of  this  section. 
Weather protection aspect to buildings, such as protection from wind, water, seis-
mic impact etc., shall comply with Municipality regulations and requirements. 

6.1.3. 

The intention of this section is to ensure that flame spread on roofing is restricted. 

 

6.2.  Components of Roofing Systems 

 

6.2.1. 

Roofing systems are composed of varying types of components such as Roof cover-
ings, Organic or Glass Fiber, Asphalt felts, Metal Composite panels, Sandwich Pan-
els, Photovoltaic Panels, Single Ply Membrane, Insulation, Support System etc. 

 

Figure 1.23.: Various components of Roofing System 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 183 of 13486.3.  Roofing System Testing and Acceptance 

6.3.1. 

The  roofing  systems  manufacturers/suppliers  and  their  product  systems  shall  be 
registered with Municipality and Civil Defense Authority. 

6.3.2. 

The performance requirements of roofing systems shall be classified based on the 
following criteria. 

 

6.3.3. 

6.3.4. 

a.  Occupancy of the building. 
b.  Sprinkler protection for the building. 
c.  Distance and proximity to other buildings. 
d.  Construction Type and Building materials used. 

 

The roofing systems shall be certified and listed by a third party independent Test-
ing and Certification body, approved by Civil Defense. 
 
Parties seeking approval for roof assemblies or rooftop structures shall furnish the 
test certificates, approval certification numbers for the system as an assembly and 
not for the individual components. 
 

6.3.5.  Only  companies  with  a  valid  commercial  license  will  be  eligible  for  Civil  Defence 
approval  if  products  are  tested  and  certified  according  to  specifications  and  re-
quirements of this code.  

 
6.3.6. 

The entire roofing system including ornaments, trims and moldings’ with intended 
thickness, involved core, insulation, joints, seams, fasteners and wall arrangement 
shall be tested in accordance with any of the following standards: 
 

6.3.7.  Only Private Villas, Commercial Villas and Agricultural buildings are exempted from 

having fire rated/ listed roof assemblies or rooftop structures.  
 
Roof coverings with following materials shall be allowed without testing and certi-
fication.  

6.3.8. 

 

 

a.  Brick, masonry or concrete exposed roof deck  
b.  Tiles/ Slates made up of concrete or clay  
c.  Copper or ferrous sheets/shingles  

6.4.  Design, Installation, Inspection & Maintenance 
 

6.4.1.  Design/Specification/Submittals  

6.4.1.1. It  is  consultant’s  responsibility  to  recruit  roofing  specialists  to  design 

roofing systems in full compliance with this code. 

6.4.1.2. Consultant’s roofing submittal to Civil Defence shall be during project de-
sign NOC application, along with architecture, fire alarm, fire fighting and 
smoke control proposals..  

6.4.1.3. Roofing  System  shall  be  specified  in  accordance  with  their  test  certifica-

tions as an assembly as per Table 1.22.  

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 184 of 1348 

 

 

Table 1.22.: Roofing System Test requirements. 

OCCUPANCY AND 
TYPE OF BUILDING 

EXTERIOR FIRE                   
EXPOSURE TO ROOFING  
ASSEMBLIES 

1. NON SPRINKLERED   

BUILDINGS, 

2. BUILDINGS WITHOUT 
FIRE SUPPRESSION 
SYSTEMS, 

3. BUILDINGS, LESS 
THAN 6 M FROM 
NEIGHBORING 
BUILDING, 

4. MALLS, 
5. ASSEMBLY, 
6. HOSPITAL, 
7. EDUCATIONAL, 

ANY OF THE FOLLOWING 
 
Class A with ASTM E 108   
Class AA with BS 476 -3 
Class Broof t4 with  
EN 13501-5: +A1 
Class A with UL 790 
Class 1 with NFPA 276 
Pass with FM 4470 or FM 4471 

8. OTHER BUILDINGS 

AND  OCCUPAN-
CIES, NOT MEN-
TIONED ABOVE 

9. BUILDINGS WITH   

SPRINKLER                  
PROTECTION 

10. BUILDINGS WITH 
FIRE                     
SUPPRESSION        
SYSTEMS 

ANY OF THE FOLLOWING 
 
Class B with NFPA 256 
Class B with ASTM E 108   
Class BB with BS 476 -3 
Class Broof t4 with  
EN 13501-5: +A1 
Class B with UL 790 

INTERIOR OR UNDER 
DECK FIRE EXPOSURE 
TO ROOFING  
ASSEMBLIES 
 

ANY OF THE FOLLOWING 
 
CLASS I rating with FM 4450 
Pass as assembly with  
UL 1256 
 
Structural Metal panel Roof 
systems shall be tested with 
FM 4471 
 
Roof systems with modified 
bitumen and other types of 
membrane roof  
systems shall be tested with 
FM 4470 

 

PLASTIC SKY LIGHTS ON 
ROOFING  
ASSEMBLIES 

ANY OF THE FOLLOWING 
 
Class A with FM 4431 
Class A with ASTM E 84 
Class A with UL 723  
Class 1 with BS 476 –7 
Class A with EN 13501-1 
 
 

ANY OF THE FOLLOWING 
 
Class B with FM 4431 
Class B with ASTM E 84 
Class B with UL 723  
Class 2 with BS 476 –7 
Class B with EN 13501-1 

6.4.1.4.  For  Roof  recovering  situations,  where  covering  an  existing  roofing  system  with a  new 
roofing system or Roof Replacement situations where removing an existing roof system 
and replacing it with a new system, the following methods shall apply. 

 

a.  Certified  insulated  systems  may  be  installed  over  existing  certified  insulated  sys-

tems when: 

 

i.  The new system is certified for use with the existing roof insulation type (glass 

fiber, perlite, wood fiber, foamed plastic, etc. 

ii.  The  total  thickness  of  insulation  in  both  systems  does  not  exceed  the  maxi-

mum specified for the new system being applied. 

 

b.  For installation over noncombustible decks, any certified insulated system utilizing 
minimum  1-in.-thick  insulation  (glass  fiber,  polyisocyanurate  or  perlite)  may  be 
used over any existing insulated system regardless of the type, provided the insula-
tion in both systems does not exceed the maximum specified for the new system 
being applied. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 185 of 1348c. 

The  above  classifications  apply  only  to  coverings  composed  of  certified  materials 
assembled as described in the individual manufacturer certifications; flashings and 
trimmings being the same as or not less than the equivalent of the roofing systems 
in  each  class,  or of  16  oz. or  heavier  copper,  No.  26 gauge  or  heavier  galvanized 
steel, or 0.019 in. thick or heavier aluminum. 

 

 6.4.1.5.  Roofing  shall  be  designed  by  a  roofing  specialist  designer  and  shall  specify  in  accord-
ance with their test certifications, as an assembly as per Table 1.22. and manufacturer’s 
recommendations. 

 

 6.4.1.6.  The system manufacturer shall provide a formal submittal to the Muncipalty and 

Civil Defence for product registration, that will consist of the following. 

 

a.  Product Data – Manufacturer's Specifications, Technical Data and Material Safety 

Data Sheet for each material including the composition and limitations, if any. 

b.  Design Listings and certifications – System design listing or test certifications, in-

cluding illustrations, from an accredited testing laboratory as per referenced stand-
ards that is applicable to each system configuration. Test reports without certifica-
tion from accredited certification bodies is invalid. 
Engineering Judgment (EJ) – Where there is deviation from a listed and certified 
system, on site, for a particular configuration, the manufacturer, specialist design-
er, roofing contractor and consultant shall jointly provide a site specific EJ.  

c. 

d.  Method Statement shall clearly define the manufacturer’s installation instructions. 
e. 
f. 

Statement of Manufacturer’s standard warranty for minimum of 10 years. 
An undertaking letter in understanding with Civil Defence, that supplying any ma-
terial that is non compliant with this code is illegal and punishable. 

6.4.2. 

Installation  

 

6.4.2.1.  The  installation  shall  be  carried  out  by  Civil  Defence  and  Municipality  approved 
installer  as  per  system  manufacturer's  installation  instructions  and  shall  comply 
with local regulations and the construction documents. 

 

6.4.3. 

Installer Qualification 

6.4.3.1.  Installer  specializing  in  Roofing  system  installation  and  certified  by  the  system 

manufacturer shall be listed with Municipality and Civil Defence Authority.  

 

6.4.3.2.  The installer license shall be based on the training and certification by the system 
manufacturer  to  install  manufacturer’s  products  as  per  specified  listed  system 
requirements. 

 

6.4.4. 

Inspection 

6.4.4.1.  The  manufacturer’s  guidelines  shall  be  available  to  and  used  by  the  inspection 

personnel. 

 
6.4.4.2.  The  consultant  shall  be  responsible  for  progressive  inspection  and  shall  sign  off 

the inspection report. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 186 of 1348Civil Defence Acceptance 

6.4.5. 
 

6.4.5.1.  The main consultant, the roofing system manufacturer, roofing system 
installer shall jointly sign off the installation and provide final inspection 
report for Civil Defence’ acceptance as evidence of compliance.  

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 187 of 1348 

7. Construction Material Test Standards, Approval and 

registration. 

 
7.1.  Acceptable Test Standards and criteria 

 
7.1.1.  All the Materials, Components, Systems, Assemblies, equipment, Products and Ac-
cessories, referred to in this chapter with respect to construction and Life Safety, 
Fire Safety and Emergency Services shall be Listed, Approved and Registered by the 
Civil Defence Material Approval Department. 

 
7.1.2.  There is no year of edition mentioned against any test standards. It is the intent of 
Civil Defence to convey to the customers seeking material tests and the test labor-
atories to follow the “LATEST EDITION OF THE TEST STANDARD, AS AND WHEN 
THEY ARE UPGRADED/REVISED/AMENDED, TO THE DATE.” 

 
7.1.3.  Fire resistance rating of Fire Walls/ Fire Barriers 
 

i.  EN 1365-1: fire resistance tests for loadbearing elements. part 1: walls.  
ii.  ASTM E 119, Standard Test Methods for Fire Tests of Building Construction and 

Materials 

iii.  EN 1364-3, Fire resistance tests for non-loadbearing elements. Curtain walling. 

Full configuration (complete assembly) 

iv.  EN 1364-4: Fire resistance tests for non-loadbearing elements - Part 4: Curtain 

walling - Part configuration 

v.  EN 1364-1, Fire resistance tests for non-loadbearing elements - Part 1: Walls; 
vi.  UL 263, Standard for Fire Tests of Building Construction and Materials. 
vii.  NFPA 251, Standard methods of tests of fire resistance of building construction 

and materials. 

viii. BS 476-21: Fire tests on building materials and structures - part 21: Methods for 
the determination of the fire resistance of loadbearing elements of construction 
ix.  BS 476-22: Fire tests on building materials and structures - part 22: Methods for 

the determination of the fire resistance of non-loadbearing elements of con-
struction 

x.  EN 1365-2  Fire classification of construction products and building elements. 

Classification using data from fire resistance tests, excluding ventilation services 

x.  UL 1709,  Construction elements with or without load: Beams, pillars, slabs, 

sealings, lockgates, ducts, walls, curtain walls, etc. 

xi.  LPS 1208, LPCB fire resistance requirements for elements of construction used 

to provide Compartmentation. 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 188 of 1348 

 

 
Interior Wall and Ceiling Finish materials and ceiling plenum assembly 

7.1.4. 

 

i. 

ASTM E 119, Standard Test Methods for Fire Tests of Building Construction and 
Materials 

ii.  UL 723, Standard for Test of Surface Burning Characteristics of Building Materi-

als 

iii.  FM 4880, Approval Standard for Class 1 Insulated Wall or Wall and Roof/

Ceiling Panels; Plastic Interior Finish Materials; Plastic Exterior Building Panels; 
Wall/Ceiling Coating Systems; Interior or Exterior Finish Systems. 

iv.  NFPA 286, Standard Methods of Fire Tests for Evaluating Contribution of Wall 

v. 

and Ceiling Interior Finish to Room Fire Growth. 
EN  13823: Reaction to fire tests for building products - Building products ex-
cluding floorings exposed to the thermal attack by a single burning item. 

vi.  EN-ISO 11925-2: Reaction to fire tests - Ignitability of products subjected to 

direct impingement of flame - Part 2: Single-flame source test. 

vii.  EN-ISO 1182: Reaction to fire tests for products - Non-combustibility test   
viii.  EN-ISO 1716: Reaction to fire tests for products - Determination of the gross 

heat of combustion (calorific value) 

ix.  EN 13501-1: Fire classification of construction products and building elements - 

Part 1: Classification using data from reaction to fire tests. 

x.  BS 476 Part 7: Fire Tests on Building materials and structures; method of test 

to determine the classification of the surface spread of flame of products 

xi.  BS 476 Part 6: Fire Tests on Building materials and structures; method of test 

for fire propagation for products 

xii.  EN 1364-2, Fire resistance tests for non-loadbearing elements. Ceilings. 
xiii.  UL 1715, Standard for Fire Test of Interior Finish Material. 

 

7.1.5.  Expanded Vinyl Wall coverings 

 
i. 

ASTM E 84, Standard Test Method of Surface Burning Characteristics of Build-
ing Materials 

ii.  UL 723, Standard for Test of Surface Burning Characteristics of Building Materi-

als 

iii.  NFPA 265., Standard methods of fire tests for evaluating room fire growth con-

tribution of textile or expanded vinyl wall coverings on full height panels and 
walls. 

iv.  EN  13823: Reaction to fire tests for building products - Building products ex-

v. 

cluding floorings exposed to the thermal attack by a single burning item. 
EN-ISO 11925-2: Reaction to fire tests - Ignitability of products subjected to 
direct impingement of flame - Part 2: Single-flame source test. 

vi.  EN-ISO 1182: Reaction to fire tests for products - Non-combustibility test   
vii.  EN-ISO 1716: Reaction to fire tests for products - Determination of the gross 

heat of combustion (calorific value) 

viii.  EN 13501-1: Fire classification of construction products and building elements - 

Part 1: Classification using data from reaction to fire tests. 

ix.  BS 476 Part 7: Fire Tests on Building materials and structures; method of test 

to determine the classification of the surface spread of flame of products 

x.  BS 476 Part 6: Fire Tests on Building materials and structures; method of test 

for fire propagation for products 

xi.  EN 14390 Fire test - Large-scale room reference test for surface products 
 
 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 189 of 1348 

 

7.1.6. 

Interior Wall and Ceiling Coverings 

 

i. 

NFPA 286, Standard methods of fire tests for evaluating contribution of wall 
and ceiling interior finish to room fire growth 

ii.  ASTM E 84, Standard Test Method of Surface Burning Characteristics of Build-

ing Materials 

iii.  UL 723, Standard for Test of Surface Burning Characteristics of Building Materi-

als. 

iv.    EN 1364-2: Fire resistance tests for non loadbearing elements. Ceilings. 
v. 

EN  13823: Reaction to fire tests for building products - Building products ex-
cluding floorings exposed to the thermal attack by a single burning item. 

vi.  EN-ISO 11925-2: Reaction to fire tests - Ignitability of products subjected to 

direct impingement of flame - Part 2: Single-flame source test. 

vii.  EN-ISO 1182: Reaction to fire tests for products - Non-combustibility test   
viii.  EN-ISO 1716: Reaction to fire tests for products - Determination of the gross 

heat of combustion (calorific value) 

ix.  EN 13501-1: Fire classification of construction products and building elements - 

Part 1: Classification using data from reaction to fire tests. 

ix.  BS 476 Part 7: Fire Tests on Building materials and structures; method of test 

to determine the classification of the surface spread of flame of products 

x.  BS 476 Part 6: Fire Tests on Building materials and structures; method of test 

for fire propagation for products 

 
Interior Floor and Floor Coverings 

7.1.7. 

 

CPSC 16 CFR, Part 1630 

i. 
ii.  NFPA 253, standard Method of Test for Critical Radiant Flux of Floor Covering 

Systems Using a Radiant Heat Energy Source 

iii.  ASTM E 648, Standard Test Method for Critical Radiant Flux of Floor Covering 

Systems Using a Radiant Heat Energy Source 

iv.  EN 13501-1: Fire Classification of Construction products and building elements;  

v. 

classification using data from reaction to fire tests 
EN ISO 9239-1 Reaction to fire tests for floorings -- Part 1: Determination of 
the burning behavior using a radiant heat source. 

vi.  DIN 4102-14 - Fire behavior of building materials and elements - Part 14: De-
termination of the burning behavior of floor covering systems using a radiant 
heat source 

vii.  ULc - S102.2,  Surface Burning Characteristics of Flooring, Floor Covering and 

Miscellaneous Materials and Assemblies. 

 
7.1.8.  Combustible Decorative Materials 
 

NFPA 701, Fire test to textiles and films. 

i. 
ii.  CAN/ULC-S109 Flame tests of flame-resistant fabrics and films 
iii.  EN  13823: Reaction to fire tests for building products - Building products ex-

cluding floorings exposed to the thermal attack by a single burning item. 

iv.  EN-ISO 11925-2: Reaction to fire tests - Ignitability of products subjected to 

direct impingement of flame - Part 2: Single-flame source test. 
EN-ISO 1182: Reaction to fire tests for products - Non-combustibility test   

v. 
vi.  EN-ISO 1716: Reaction to fire tests for products - Determination of the gross 

heat of combustion (calorific value) 

x.  BS 476 Part 6: Fire Tests on Building materials and structures; method of test 

for fire propagation for products 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 190 of 1348 

 

vii.  EN 13501-1: Fire classification of construction products and building elements - 

Part 1: Classification using data from reaction to fire tests. 

xiii.  BS 476 Part 7: Fire Tests on Building materials and structures; method of test 

to determine the classification of the surface spread of flame of products 

 
7.1.9.  Textile Wall and Textile Ceiling  Materials  
 

i. 

ASTM E 84, Standard Test Method of Surface Burning Characteristics of Build-
ing Materials 

ii.  UL 723, Standard for Test of Surface Burning Characteristics of Building Materi-

als. 

iii.  BS 476 Part 7: Fire Tests on Building materials and structures; method of test 

to determine the classification of the surface spread of flame of products 

iv.  BS 476 Part 6: Fire Tests on Building materials and structures; method of test 

for fire propagation for products 
EN 13501-1 Fire classification of construction products and building elements. 
Classification using test data from reaction to fire tests 

v. 

 

7.1.10.  Carpets and Textile floor finish  
 

i 

ii. 

ASTM D 2859, Standard Test Method for Ignition Characteristics of Finished 
Textile Floor Covering Materials. 
EN  13823: Reaction to fire tests for building products - Building products ex-
cluding floorings exposed to the thermal attack by a single burning item. 

iii.  EN-ISO 11925-2: Reaction to fire tests - Ignitability of products subjected to 

direct impingement of flame - Part 2: Single-flame source test. 

iv.  EN-ISO 1182: Reaction to fire tests for products - Non-combustibility test   
v. 

EN-ISO 1716: Reaction to fire tests for products - Determination of the gross 
heat of combustion (calorific value) 

vi.  EN 13501-1: Fire classification of construction products and building elements - 

Part 1: Classification using data from reaction to fire tests. 

vii.  ASTM E648, Standard test method for critical radiant flux of floor covering sys-

tems using a radiant heat source 

viii.  EN ISO 9239-1 Reaction to fire tests for floorings -- Part 1: Determination of 

the burning behavior using a radiant heat source. 

ix.  NFPA 253, Standard method of test for critical radiant flux of floor covering 

systems using a radiant heat energy source.  

x.  ULc - S102.2,  Surface Burning Characteristics of Flooring, Floor Covering and 

Miscellaneous Materials and Assemblies. 

 
 

7.1.11.  Thermal Barriers (Temperature rise shall not exceed 2500 C on unexposed surface) 

 
i.  The average temperature rise of the unexposed surface shall not rise more 
than 250°C after 15 minutes of fire exposure as per ASTM E 119 or UL 263. 
The thermal barrier shall remain in place for not less than 15 minutes as per 
UL 1040 or UL 1715.  

ii.  NFPA 275, Standard Method of Fire Tests for the Evaluation of Thermal Barriers 

Used Over Foam Plastic Insulation  

iii.  EN 1364-1 Fire resistance tests for non-loadbearing elements. Walls 
 
 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 191 of 1348 

7.1.12.  Through– penetration Fire stop System 

 
i. 

ASTM E 814, Standard Test Method for Fire Tests of Through-Penetration Fire 
Stops 

ii.  UL 1479, Standard for Safety for Fire Tests of Through-Penetration Fire Stop 
iii.  EN 1366-3: Fire resistance tests for penetration seals  
iv.  UL 263, Standard for Fire Tests of Building Construction and Materials. 
v. 
 

FM 4990, Approval standard for firestopping. 

7.1.13.  Fire resistant Joint System 

ASTM E 1966, Standard Test Method for Fire-Resistive Joint Systems 

 
i. 
ii.  UL 2079, Standard for Tests for Fire Resistance of Building Joint Systems. 
iii.  EN 1366-4: Fire resistance tests for service installations. Linear joint seals 
iv.  FM 4990, Approval standard for firestopping. 
 

7.1.14.  Membrane Fire stop System 

 
i. 

ASTM E 814, Standard Test Method for Fire Tests of Through-Penetration Fire 
Stops 

ii.  UL 1479, Standard for Safety for Fire Tests of Through-Penetration Fire Stop 
iii.  EN 1366-3: Fire resistance tests for penetration seals  
iv.  UL 263, Standard for Fire Tests of Building Construction and Materials. 
v. 
vi.  EN 1366-4: Fire resistance tests for service installations. Linear joint seals 

FM 4990, Approval standard for firestopping. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 192 of 1348 
7.1.15.  Fire resistance rated Glazing in Doors and Walls is acceptable with following 
 

i. 

ASTM E 119, Standard Test Methods for Fire Tests of Building Construction and 
Materials 
  UL 263, Standard for Fire Tests of Building Construction and Materials. 

ii. 
iii.    EN 1364-1, Fire resistance tests for non-loadbearing elements - Part 1: Walls; 
iv.    EN 1634 - 1, Fire resistance test for door and shutter assemblies and openable 

v. 

  windows 
  EN 15254-4: Extended application of results from fire resistance tests - Non-
  loadbearing walls - Part 4: Glazed constructions 

vi.    BS 476-22: Fire tests on building materials and structures - part 22:  Methods 

  for the determination of the fire resistance of non-loadbearing elements of 
  construction. 

vii.    UL 10B, Standard for Fire Tests of Door Assemblies 

 

7.1.16.  Fire retardant coatings  
 

i. 

ii. 

ASTM E 276, Standard Test Method for Extended Duration Surface Burning 
Characteristics of Building Materials. 
EN 13381-4, Test methods for determining the contribution to the fire re-
sistance of structural members - Part 4: Applied passive protection to steel 
members 

iii.  EN 13381-8, Test methods for determining the contribution to the fire re-

sistance of structural members - Part 8: Applied reactive protection to steel 
members 

 

7.1.17.  Perimeter fire barrier system/Exterior curtainwall/floor intersection 

 
i. 

ASTM E 2307, Standard Test Method for Determining Fire Resistance of Perim-
eter Fire Barriers Using Intermediate-Scale, Multi-story Test Apparatus 

ii.  UL 2079,  Standard Test Method for Determining Fire Resistance of Perimeter 

Fire Barrier Systems Using Intermediate-Scale, Multi-Story Test Apparatus, 

iii.  EN 1364-4 Fire resistance tests for non-loadbearing elements. Curtain walling. 

Part configuration 
 EN 1364-3, Fire resistance tests for non-loadbearing elements. Curtain walling. 
Full configuration (complete assembly) 

iv. 

 

7.1.18.  Glazing in door assembly 

 
i. 
ii.  UL 10B/10C, Standard for Fire Tests of Door Assemblies/ Standard for Positive 

NFPA 252, Standard methods of fire tests of door assemblies. 

Pressure Fire Tests of Door Assemblies. 

iii.    EN 1634 - 1, Fire resistance test for door and shutter assemblies and openable 

  windows 

iv.    BS 476-22: Fire tests on building materials and structures - part 22:  Methods 

  for the determination of the fire resistance of non-loadbearing elements of 
  construction 

 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 193 of 1348 

 

7.1.19.  Plastic skylights on roof assembly (See classification requirements Table 1.22) 
 

FM 4431, Approval standard for skylights. 

i. 
ii.  ASTM E 84, Standard Test Method of Surface Burning Characteristics of Build-

ing Materials. 

iii.  EN 13501-5: Fire classification of construction products and building elements - 

Part 5: Classification using data from external fire exposure to roofs tests 

iv.  UL 723, Standard for Test of Surface Burning Characteristics of Building Materi-

als. 

v.  BS 476-7: Surface Flammability test to Building Material 
vi.  EN 13501-2 with Fire Test to Building Material - Classification 
vii.  CEN/TS  1187: Test methods for external fire exposure to roofs. 
viii.  ANSI/UL 790, Standard Test Methods for Fire Tests of Roof Covering. 

 
7.1.20.  Roof Assemblies (Exterior fire exposure, See classification requirements in Table 

1.22.) 

 

i. 
ii. 

BS 476-3: Standard Test Methods for Fire Tests of Roof Coverings. 
EN 13501-5: Fire classification of construction products and building elements. 
Classification using data from external fire exposure to roofs tests. 

iii.  NFPA 276, Standard method of fire test for determining the heat release rate 

of roofing assemblies with combustible above-deck roofing components 

iv.  FM 4470, Approval standard for single ply, polymer modified bitumen sheet, 

built-up roof (BUR) and liquid applied roof assemblies for use in Class 1 and 
non combustible roof construction. 
FM 4471, Approval standard for Class 1 panel roofs. 

v. 
vi.  CEN/TS 1187: Test methods for external fire exposure to roofs. 
vii.  LPS 1505 Requirements and tests for the LPCB approval and listing of roofing 

systems - protection against fire from outside the building. 

 
7.1.21.  Roof Assemblies (Interior fire exposure, See classification requirements in Table 

1.22.) 

 

FM 4450, Approval standard for Class 1 insulated steel roof deck roofs. 

i. 
ii.  UL1256, Standard for Fire Test of Roof Deck Constructions. 
iii.  FM 4471, Approval standard for Class 1 panel roofs. 
 

7.1.22.  Roof Coverings 

 
i. 

FM 4470, Approval standard for single ply, polymer modified bitumen sheet, 
built-up roof (BUR) and liquid applied roof assemblies for use in Class 1 and 
non combustible roof construction.  

ii.  ANSI/UL 790, Standard Test Methods for Fire Tests of Roof Covering. 
iii.  ASTM E 108, Standard Test Methods for Fire Tests of Roof Coverings. 
iv.  UL1256, Standard for Fire Test of Roof Deck Constructions. 
v.  NFPA 256, Standard methods of fire tests of roof coverings  
vi.  BS 476-3: Standard Test Methods for Fire Tests of Roof Coverings. 
vii.  CEN/TS 1187: Test methods for external fire exposure to roofs 
viii.  EN 13501-5: Fire classification of construction products and building elements - 

Part 5: Classification using data from external fire exposure to roofs tests 

ix.  LPS 1505 Requirements and tests for the LPCB approval and listing of roofing 

systems - protection against fire from outside the building. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 194 of 1348 

 

7.1.23.  Foam Plastic used in freezer rooms shall have flash and self ignition not less than 

4270 C with 

 

ASTM D 1929, Standard Test Method for Determining Ignition Temperature of 
Plastics. 
LPS 1181 -2  Requirements and tests for sandwich panels and built up systems 
for use as internal constructions in buildings. 

i. 

ii. 

 

7.1.24.  Factory manufactured or prefabricated panels with foam plastic insulation. (See 

Sandwich panels, Table 1.17.a,b,c for specific details) 

 

i. 

ii. 

NFPA285, Standard FireTest Method for Evaluation of Fire Propagation Charac-
teristics of Exterior Non-Load-Bearing Wall Assemblies Containing Combustible 
Components. (Exterior wall applications) 
EN  13823: Reaction to fire tests for building products - Building products ex-
cluding floorings exposed to the thermal attack by a single burning item. 

iii.  EN-ISO 11925-2: Reaction to fire tests - Ignitability of products subjected to 

direct impingement of flame - Part 2: Single-flame source test 

iv.  EN-ISO 1182: Reaction to fire tests for products - Non-combustibility test  and 

EN-ISO 1716: Reaction to fire tests for products - Determination of the gross 
heat of combustion (calorific value) 

vi.  EN 13501-1: Fire classification of construction products and building elements - 

Part 1: Classification using data from reaction to fire tests 

vii.  LPS 1181 -2  Requirements and tests for sandwich panels and built up systems 

for use as internal constructions in buildings. 

viii.  EN 13163 - Thermal insulation products for buildings - Factory made expanded 

polystyrene (EPS) products - Specification 

ix.  EN 13164 - Thermal insulation products for buildings - Factory made extruded 

x. 

polystyrene foam (XPS) products - Specification 
EN 13165 - Thermal insulation products for buildings - Factory made rigid poly-
urethane foam (PU) products - Specification 

xi.  EN 13166 - Thermal insulation products for buildings - Factory made phenolic 

foam (PF) products - Specification 

xii.  EN 13167 - Thermal insulation products for buildings - Factory made cellular 

glass (CG) products - Specification. 

 

7.1.25.  MCM/ ACP and core 

 
i.  See Chapter 1, Table 1.14.a.  
 

7.1.26.  MCM and ACP Panel Wall Systems as Assembly  
 

i. 

See Chapter 1, Table 1.14.b. 

 

7.1.27.  EIFS/ETICS  

 

 

i. 

See Chapter 1, Table 1.15.a. and Table 1.15.b. 

7.1.28.  PEWFS Wall System  
 

See Chapter 1, Table 1.16.a. and Table 1.16.b. 

i. 
 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 195 of 1348 

 

7.1.29.  Sandwich Panels  
 

i. 

See Chapter 1, Table 1.17.a. , Table 1.17.b. and Table 1.17.c. 

 
7.1.30.  Doors Assemblies shall satisfy any of the following 
 

i. 

UL 10B/10C, Standard for Fire Tests of Door Assemblies/ Standard for Positive 
Pressure Fire Tests of Door Assemblies 

ii.  NFPA 252, Standard methods of fire tests of door assemblies 
iii.  EN 1634-1: Fire resistance and smoke control tests for door, shutter and, open-

able window assemblies and elements of building hardware. Fire resistance 
tests for doors, shutters and openable windows 

iv.  BS 476: Part 22, Methods of determination of fire resistance of non load bear-

ing elements of construction. 
EN 1364-1: Fire resistance tests for non-loadbearing elements: Part 1 - Walls 

v. 

 
7.1.31.  Window Assemblies shall satisfy any of the following 
 

UL 9, Standard for Fire Tests of Window Assemblies. 

i. 
ii.  NFPA 257, Standard on fire test for window and glass block assemblies. 
iii.  EN 1634-1: Fire resistance and smoke control tests for door, shutter and, open-

able window assemblies and elements of building hardware. Fire resistance 
tests for doors, shutters and openable windows. 

iv.  ASTM E 119, Standard Test Methods for Fire Tests of Building Construction and 

Materials 

 

7.1.32.  Upholstered furniture 
 

i.  16 CFR 1634 Flammability Test to Upholstered furniture. 
ii.  EN 1021-1, Fire test to upholstered furniture (Smouldering cigarette) 
iii.  BS 7176, Fire test to upholstered furniture for non domestic seating. 
iv.  BS 5852: Methods of test for assessment of the ignitability of upholstered 

seating by smoldering and flaming ignition sources. 

v.   ASTM 1537, Standard Test Method for Fire Testing of Upholstered Furniture 
vi.  EN 1021-2, Fire test to upholstered furniture (Match flame) 
vii.  UL 1286, Standard for Office Furnishings 

 
7.1.33.  Fire Damper (90 minutes and 3 hour fire rated) 

 
i.  ANSI/UL 555, Standard for Fire Dampers. 
ii.  EN 1366-2 Fire resistance tests for service installations. Fire dampers. 
iii.  EN 13501-3: Fire classification of construction products and building elements - 

Part 3: Classification using data from fire resistance tests on products and ele-
ments used in building service installations: fire resisting ducts and fire dampers 

 

7.1.34.  Combination (Fire/Smoke) Damper (90 minutes and 3 hour fire rated ) 

 
i. 

ii. 

ANSI/UL 555, Standard for Fire Dampers, and ANSI/UL 555S, Standard for 
Smoke Dampers. 
EN 1366-10 Fire resistance tests for service installations. Smoke control damp-
ers.  

iii.    EN 13501-3: Fire classification of construction products and building elements - 

  Part 3: Classification using data from fire resistance tests on products and ele-
ments used in building service installations: fire resisting ducts and fire dampers 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 196 of 1348 
7.1.35.  Glazing System on non load bearing wall/ Curtainwall system shall satisfy any of 

the following 
 
i.  ASTM E 119, Standard Test Methods for Fire Tests of Building Construction and 

Materials. 

ii.  EN 1364-3, Fire resistance tests for non-loadbearing elements. Curtain walling. 

Full configuration (complete assembly) 

iii.  UL 263, Standard for Fire Tests of Building Construction and Materials. 
iv.  NFPA 251, Standard methods of tests of fire resistance of building construction 

and materials. 

v.  EN 1364-1: fire resistance tests for non-loadbearing elements. part 1: walls. 
vi.  BS 476: Part 22, Methods of determination of fire resistance of non load      

  bearing elements of construction. 

 
7.1.36.  Glazing System on  load bearing floor/roof shall satisfy any of the following 

 
i.  ASTM E 119, Standard Test Methods for Fire Tests of Building Construction and 

Materials. 

ii.  UL 263, Standard for Fire Tests of Building Construction and Materials. 
iii.  NFPA 251, Standard methods of tests of fire resistance of building construction 

and materials. 

iv.   EN 1365-2: Fire resistance tests for loadbearing floor/roof. 
v.  BS 476-21: Fire tests on building materials and structures - part 21:    

   
Methods for the determination of the fire resistance of loadbearing elements of 
  construction 

 

 

 

 
7.1.37.  Safety Glazing shall satisfy any of the following 

 
i.  EN 12600, Glass in building - Pendulum test - Impact test method and classifica-

tion for flat glass. 

ii.  ANSI Z97, American National Standard for Safety Glazing Materials Used in 

Buildings -Safety Performance Specifications and Methods of Test 

iii.  CPSC 16 CR 1202 
iv.  For shower enclosures: EN 14428, Shower enclosures - Functional requirements 

and test methods 

 
7.1.38.  Structural Steelwork Test standards 

 
i.  BS 5950 The structural use of steelwork in buildings 
ii.  BS 5950-8: 2003 Structural use of steelwork in buildings – Part 8; Code of Prac-

tice for fire resistant design 

iii.  BS 476-20: 1987 Method for determination of the fire resistance of load bearing 

elements of construction (general principles) 

iv.  BS 476-21: 1987 Method for determination of the fire resistance of load bearing 

elements of construction 

v.  BS 476-23: 1987 Methods for determination of the fire resistance of the contri-

bution of components to the fire resistance of a structure. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 197 of 13487.1.39.  Structural Steelwork Test standards 

 
i. 
ii.  BS 5950-8: 2003 Structural use of steelwork in buildings – Part 8; Code of Prac-

BS 5950 The structural use of steelwork in buildings 

tice for fire resistant design 

iii.  BS 476-20: Method for determination of the fire resistance of load bearing ele-

ments of construction (general principles) 

iv.  BS 476-21: Method for determination of the fire resistance of load bearing ele-

ments of construction 

v.  BS 476-23: Methods for determination of the fire resistance of the contribu-

tion of components to the fire resistance of a structure. 

vi.  EN 1363-1, Fire resistance tests — Part 1: General requirements 
vii.  EN 1363-2, Fire resistance tests — Part 2: Alternative and additional proce-

dures 

viii.  EN 1365-3, Fire resistance tests for loadbearing elements — Part 3: Beams 
ix.  EN 1365-4, Fire resistance tests for loadbearing elements — Part 4: Columns 
EN 1993-1-1, Eurocode 3: Design of steel structures — Part 1-1: General rules 
x. 
and rules for buildings 

xi.  EN 1993-1-2, Eurocode 3: Design of steel structures — Part 1-2: General rules 

— Structural fire design 

xii.  EN 13381-4, Test methods for determining the contribution to the fire re-

sistance of structural members - Part 4: Applied passive protection to steel 
members 

xiii.  EN 13381-8, Test methods for determining the contribution to the fire re-

sistance of structural members - Part 8: Applied reactive protection to steel 
members. 

 

7.1.40.  Kiosks shall be Class A with any of the following 

 
i. 

ii. 

Particleboard conforming to Type PBU of ANSI A208.1., not less than 6.4 mm 
thick. 
Foamed plastics having a maximum heat release rate not greater than 100 kW 
when tested in accordance with UL1975 or in accordance with NFPA289, 
Standard Method of Fire Test for Individual Fuel Packages, using the 20 kW 
ignition source. 

iii.  Textile confirming to NFPA 701, Standard Methods of Fire Tests for Flame 

Propagation of Textiles and Films or section 7.1.10. of this chapter. 

iv.  Metal Composite Panels confirming to Section 7.1.24. of this chapter. 
 

7.1.41.  Membrane Structure shall be Class A with any of the following 
 

i. 

ASTM E 84, Standard Test Method of Surface Burning Characteristics of Build-
ing Materials 

ii.  UL 723, Standard for Test of Surface Burning Characteristics of Building Materi-

als. 

iii.  BS 476 Part 7: Fire Tests on Building materials and structures; method of test 

to determine the classification of the surface spread of flame of products 

iv.  EN 13501-1 Fire classification of construction products and building elements. 

Classification using test data from reaction to fire tests 

v.  NFPA 701, Fire test to textiles and films. 

 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 198 of 1348 

 

7.1.42.  Tents shall be Class A with any of the following 
 

i.  NFPA 701, Standard Methods of Fire Tests for Flame Propagation of Textiles 

ii. 

and Films. 
EN 13501-1 Fire classification of construction products and building elements. 
Classification using test data from reaction to fire tests 

iii.  ASTM E 84, Standard Test Method of Surface Burning Characteristics of Build-

ing Materials 

iv.  UL 723, Standard for Test of Surface Burning Characteristics of Building Materi-

als. 

iv.  BS 476 Part 7: Fire Tests on Building materials and structures; method of test 

to determine the classification of the surface spread of flame of products 

 
7.1.43.  Air-Inflated Structure and Air-Supported Structure  

 
i. 

 

Shall be designed and operated in accordance with ASCE/SEI 17, Air Supported 
Structures. 

7.1.44.  Advertising Billboards (Using Combustible Materials)  

 
i.  NFPA 701, Standard Methods of Fire Tests for Flame Propagation of Textiles 

i. 

and Films. 
ASTM E 84, Standard Test Method of Surface Burning Characteristics of Build-
ing Materials 

ii.  UL 723, Standard for Test of Surface Burning Characteristics of Building Materi-

als 

iii.  NFPA 265., Standard methods of fire tests for evaluating room fire growth con-

tribution of textile or expanded vinyl wall coverings on full height panels and 
walls. 

 

7.1.45.  Non-Combustible Material for Cavity Fire Barrier (Groove sealants, Gaskets, Back-

er Rod and vapour barrier systems)  

 

i. 

EN 13501-1, Class A1 or A2 (Fire classification of construction products and 
building elements. Classification using test data from reaction to fire tests) 
ii.  BS 476-4, Non-Combustible (Fire classification of construction products and 
building elements. Classification using test data from reaction to fire tests) 
ISO 1182, Non-Combustible (Fire classification of construction products and 
building elements. Classification using test data from reaction to fire tests) 

iii. 

iv.  Gaskets, tested to EN 13501-1 and achieving class B-s2-d0 or C-s2-d0 shall be 

permitted.  

v.     EPDM products, Rubber sheeting and architectural carpets tested to EN 13501-

1 and achieving class B-s2-d0 or C-s2-d0 shall be permitted.  

vi.    Artificial Turf.  See Chapter 1, Section 4, 4.5.6.4. for test requirements. 

 
7.1.46.  Modular Homes/Offices  
 

Class B, with ASTM E-84, Standard Test for Surface Burning Characters 
Class B with UL 723, Standard Test for Surface Burning Characters 
Limited Combustible, with FM 4880, Standard test for insulated wall panels 

i. 
i. 
ii. 
 

7.1.47.  GRC/ GRFC/ GRP Panels  
 

i. 

See Chapter 1, Table 1.18.a.  and Table 1.18.b. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 199 of 1348Chapter 2 
FIRE SERVICE VEHICLE AND 
PERSONNEL ACCESSIBILITY 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 200 of 1348In this Chapter: 
Î  Fire access road specifications. 
Î  Fire fighters access to and inside buildings. 
Î  Fire boat access and docking 
Î  Fire apparatus specifications. 
Î  Fire station design guidelines 

Intent of the Chapter: 
•  To ensure Civil Defence and their firefighting trucks, vehicles and 
fireboats have approved accessway with desired clear dimensions 
and load carrying capacities to developments, buildings and gated 
subdivisions. 

•  To  ensure  proper  access  to  buildings  and  fire  and  Life  Safety 

equipment are available for fire fighters. 

•  To  ensure  sufficient  water  supply  is  available  through  fixed 

firefighting systems. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 201 of 1348 

In this Chapter : 

INTENTIONS 

  Fire Access Road specifications. 

  Fire Fighters access to and 

inside buildings. 

  Fire Boat Access and Docking 

  Fire Apparatus specifications. 

  Fire Station design guidelines 

 

  To ensure Civil Defence and their Fire fighting trucks, 
vehicles and Fire Boats have  approved accessway with 
desired clear dimensions and load carrying capacities to 
developments, buildings and gated subdivisions. 

  To ensure proper access to buildings and Fire and Life 

Safety equipment are available for Fire Fighters. 

  To ensure sufficient water supply is available through 

fixed Fire Fighting Systems.  

1. Definitions 

1.1.  Fire Access Roadway  
 

The road to the building or structure to allow access for Civil Defence fire-fighting and res-
cue apparatus. 

 
1.2.  Fire Service access level 
 

Level where Civil Defence Fire Appliances (Fire Truck/Engine) are deployed and where fire 
fighters have direct access into the building. 

 
1.3.  Fire Accessway 
 

The path adjacent to the building or structure to allow operational setup for Civil Defence 
fire-fighting and rescue apparatus such as Aerial Appliances. 

 
1.4.  Turning Facility 
 

The Fire access Road arrangements such as T-Turn, V-turn, U-Turn, where Civil Defence Fire 
Vehicles can make turns, usually to overcome dead ends. 

 
1.5.   Breeching inlet 
 

A connection through which the Civil Defence fire department can pump supplemental wa-
ter into the sprinkler system, standpipe, or other system, furnishing water for fire extin-
guishment or to supplement existing water supplies. 

1.6.  Landing Valve 
 

A 65 mm diameter instantaneous water outlet normally located near the staircase for 
trained or Civil Defence fire fighters to use during fire. 

1.7.  Hose Reel or Hose Rack  
 

A 25 mm or 40 mm diameter instantaneous water outlet with a connected hose for trained 
Photo Caption 
occupants or Civil Defence fire fighters to use during fire. 
 

1.8.  Standpipe 
 

The vertical portion of the system piping that delivers the water supply for hose connec-
tions (and sprinklers on combined systems), vertically from floor to floor. The term stand-
pipe can also refer to the horizontal portion of the system piping that delivers the water 
supply for two or more hose connections (and sprinklers on combined systems) on a single 
level. 

 

 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 202 of 13481.9.  Fire Vehicle (Fire Fighting Apparatus)  
 

Fire Vehicle or Fire Fighting Apparatus is designed for fire fighters and is used by Civil De-
fence trained fire fighters to carry water and fight fires. These Vehicles are equipped with 
Water, pumps, extinguishing agents, extinguishers, Rescue and smoke venting tools and 
equipment. Please see section 4 

 
1.10.  Fire Boat 
 

A fireboat is a vessel designed for fire fighting and is staffed by trained Civil Defence fire 
fighters.  Fire Boats are used by Civil Defence for rescue, fire fighting platform on water and 
can also pump water to shore side fire fighting operations. Please see section 4 

 
1.11.  Berth 
 

Berth is the term used in ports, harbors and water front for designated location where 
boats and vessels can be moored. 

 
1.12.  Mooring 
 

Mooring is the term used for securing a boat or vessel to the berth utilizing thick ropes 
(Mooring lines) by fixing one end to the boat or vessel and the other end to fittings on deck 
or shore. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 203 of 1348 

2.  Fire Access for Fire Vehicles and Fire Fighters  

 

2.1.  Intention 

 2.1.1.   The Fire Access requirements are to address the following. 

 

2.1.1.1.  Civil Defence Fire-fighters need to be able to reach a fire quickly, with their 
equipment, if they are to successfully deal with a fire. This is even more im-
portant in a high rise building where the fire could be at a height of many 
meters from fire service access level.  

 
2.1.1.2.  Physical safety and lives of the fire-fighters and those of the occupants of the 

building, and the preservation of the building and its contents, can be jeop-
ardized by delays in reaching the Fire scene.  
 

2.1.1.3.  Fire-fighting access to and into the building should be aimed at assisting the 

Civil Defence service in protecting life, protecting fire-fighters, reducing 
building losses, salvaging property and 
goods and minimizing environmental 
damage.  

Did You Know? 

 

2.2.  General Requirements 

 
2.2.1.  The Fire access roads and Fire accesways shall also 
consider Urban Infrastructure manuals and individ-
ual authority requirements in individual Emirates 
of UAE. 

 
2.2.2.  The requirements in this chapter are minimum 

guidelines. It is consultant’s responsibility to refer 
to international standards, Civil Defence operation-
al updates, Civil Defence vehicle updates and adapta-
of new technologies and strategies by Civil Defence. 

Department of Civil De-

fence in United Arab 

Emirates was estab-

lished in 1976, just 5 

years after Unification. 

The First Fire Station in 

Dubai was established 

in 1964. 

tion 

 
2.2.3.  The standards and documents referred for this chapter are NFPA 1, NFPA 14, NFPA 24, 
NFPA 22, NFPA 20, British Approved document B5, Civil Defence Fire Apparatus Spec-
ifications,  . 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 204 of 1348 

2.3.  Fire Access Roadways for Fire Vehicles 

2.3.1.  Civil Defence Fire access Roadways shall be provided to every facility, every structure 

and every under construction buildings, except detached retail units, kiosks, store 
rooms, snack bars, rest rooms which are less than 100 m2  and are remotely located 
from predominant occupancy. 

 
2.3.2.  Civil Defence Fire department access roads shall consist of Roadways, Fire Lanes, Park-

ing lot lanes, or a combination thereof.  Such Fire Accessway shall comply with         
Table 2.1. specifications. 

 
2.3.3.  Fire access road shall be  of concrete , asphalt or such solid surface acceptable to Civil 

Defence 

 
2.3.4.   When a bridge is required to be used as part of a fire department access road, it shall 
be constructed and maintained in accordance with  Municipality and Road Transport 
Authority’s recognized standards. 

 
2.3.5.  The bridge shall be designed for a live load sufficient to carry the imposed loads of fire 

Vehicle, as per Table 2.1. 

 
2.3.6.  Vehicle load limits shall be posted at both entrances to bridges. 
 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 205 of 1348 

REQUIREMENTS 

Table 2.1: Fire Access Roadways and route specifications 

FIRE ACCESS 
ROAD FOR 
STANDARD FIRE  
APPLIANCE 

FIRE ACCESS ROAD 
FOR HIGH REACH 
FIRE APPLIANCE 

41,000 kg 

81,000 kg 

Minimum weight carrying capacity of all-weather driving 
surface to withstand Civil Defence Vehicle  

Maximum Dead end 

Minimum  Unobstructed Width 

Minimum Unobstructed Road Width between Kerbs  

Minimum Width of Gateways 

45 m 

6 m 

6 m 

4.5 m 

Minimum Unobstructed vertical clearance for any Grade 

4.5 m 

Maximum Road Grade 

Minimum Turning Circle (Roundabout) Radius 

 

2.4.  Fire Access Roadway Gate 

10% 

12 m 

45 m 

6 m 

6 m 

4.5 m 

4.5 m 

10% 

12 m 

2.4.1.  Fire access Roadway Gate width shall be 4500 mm. 
 
2.4.2.  Gates shall be of swinging, sliding or lifting types. 
 
2.4.3.  Electric and automatic gates shall be equipped with a manual overriding facility such 

that Civil Defence personnel can open the gate during power failures and emergencies. 

 
2.4.4.  Locks shall not be installed on Fire access road gates unless it is attended  continuously 
by security guards or keys are located on-site and the gates may be readily unlocked.  

 

2.5.  Signage 

2.5.1.  Fire access Roadways and Fire accesssway shall be free of obstruction and designated 

parking for Fire vehicles shall be available at all times. Signs shall be provided with  
 ‘NO PARKING, FIRE LANE’ and ‘PARKING RESERVED OF CIVIL DEFENCE’ Signage. Size of 
wordings shall not be less than 50mm. 

NO PARKING 

 PARKING 

FIRE LANE 

RESERVED FOR  

FOR CIVIL DEFENCE 

CIVIL DEFENCCE FIRE LANE 

 

 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 206 of 1348 

2.6.  Fire Accessway for Fire Vehicles 

 

2.6.1.  The accesssway shall have a minimum width of 6 m throughout. Such access   

 
 way must be able to accommodate the entry and maneuvering of fire engine,    
 extended ladders, pumping appliances, aerial appliances, turntable and / or    
 
 hydraulic platforms.  

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
2.6.2.  Accessway shall be provided to within 18 m of breeching inlet for all midrise and high-

rise buildings that exceed the habitable height of 15 m.  

Figure 2.1: Vertical Clearance for Fire Vehicle 

 
 

Figure 2.2: Security Barrier for Fire Vehicle 

2.6.3.  Overhead obstruction to 

accessway could be en-
trance gate, link or 
bridges connecting 
buildings.  However, 
vertical clearance of 4.5 
m for the Accessway 
shall be maintained. See 
Figure 2.1.  

 

 
 

2.6.4.  The security barrier, when lifted 
up, shall not obstruct the fire en-
gine accessway. Eaves of the se-
curity post or guard house shall 
not project into the fire engine 
accessway. See Figure 2.2. 
And 2.3.  

  
 
2.6.5.  Accessway provided on turfed 

area such as synthetic grass, 
composite material, sports sur-
faces must be marked with con-
trasting object (preferably reflec-
tive) that is visible at night. The 
markings are to be at an interval 
not more than 3 meters apart 
and shall be provided on both 
sides of the accessway.  

Figure 2.3: Security guard house eaves clearance 

 
 

Table 2.2: Fire Vehicle Access Specifications 

CIVIL DEFENCE VEHICLE ACCESS SPECIFICATIONS 

REQUIREMENTS 

Maximum Parking distance of Civil Defence Vehicle from building entrance   

Maximum Parking distance of Civil Defence Vehicle from Breeching inlet  

Maximum Road Grade of the Civil Defence Vehicle Access  

15 m 

18 m 

10% 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 207 of 1348 

 

2.6.6.  Accessway and fire engine access road shall be kept clear of obstructions and other 
protruded parts of the building, plants, trees or other fixtures such that they do not 
obstruct the path between the accessway and access openings of the building. 

 

 

Note:  The podium edge is obstructing the reach 

of the boom of fire engine to 4th storey. 
Other obstructions could be roadside 
trees, entrance porch etc. To allow full 
extension of aerial ladders at a safe climb-
ing or elevation angle Ø of 60 to 80 de-
grees, sufficient space is needed to posi-
tion the fire engine. Such obstructions 
should be avoided for buildings without 
firefighting lifts and firefighting lobbies. 
Public road may be used as hard standing 
by fire engine, provided the edge of the 
public road to the facade of the building 
where access openings are located is not 
exceeding 10m.  See Figure 2.4.  

 

The fire engine shall be located at least 2m 
from the building, but not more than 10m 
away from the external wall or façade 
(including any overhead obstruction) of 
the building.  

If the fire engine is located within 2m 

 
from the building, the aerial ladder when 

Figure 2.4: Obstruction to Fire Vehicle 

set-up would fall outside the safe working limit i.e. the inclination of the ladder would 
be too steep. If the fire engine is located more than 10m from the building, the effec-
tive reach of the aerial ladder would be reduced.  

 
2.6.7.  A suitable access pathway shall also be provided to enable fire-fighters to inspect all 
elevations of a building during or after a fire. A suitable pathway could be a paved or 
gravel path.  Any such pathway should be a minimum of 1 m wide and Plants, Bushes, 
Walls or other features should not impede such pathway.  

 
2.6.8.  Fire Hydrants, where required as per Chapter 9, shall be located along the Fire Access 

Road and Fire Accessway and installed as per Chapter 9, Yard Fire Hydrants.  

FIRE TRUCK STAGING FOR ILLUSTRATION 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 208 of 13482.7.  Turning Facilities for Fire Vehicles 

 

2.7.1.  Maximum Dead End allowed on Fire Accessway is 45 m. Where Fire Accessway dead 
end exceeds 45 m, a Turning Facility shall be provided. Such Turning facility can be U-
Turn, Y-Turn, T-Turn or Roundabout.  

 
2.7.2.  U-Turn and Roundabout 
 
 

U-Turn and Roundabout specifications shall be as shown in Figure 2.5.  

 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
2.7.3.  T-Turn 
 

Figure 2.5: U-Turn specifications 

T-Turn specifications shall be as shown in Figure 2.6.  

Figure 2.6: T-Turn specifications 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 209 of 13482.7.4.  Y-Turn 
 

Y-Turn specifications shall be as shown in Figure 2.7.  

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 2.7.: Y-Turn specifications 

Points to Ponder 

In congested localities, where extension or modifications are done to existing 

buildings and developments, the Fire Accessway might be challenging. In such 

scenarios, Civil Defence might require additional Fire Fighting Systems, equip-

ment and/or Transport buggies to compensate for the ill-defined Fire Accessways. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 210 of 1348 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 

IMPORTANCE OF COMPLIANT TURNING RADII 

AND MANEUVERING OF FIRE APPARATUS 

2.8.  Extent of Fire Vehicle Access around the building 

 

2.8.1.  The accesssway shall have a minimum width of 6 m throughout. Such accessway must 
be able to accommodate the entry and maneuvering of fire engine, extended ladders, 
pumping appliances, aerial appliances, turntable and / or hydraulic platforms.  

 
 
2.8.2.  Accessway shall be positioned so that the nearer edge shall be not less than 2 m or 

more than 10 m from the building, measured horizontally.  

 
 

HIGH REACH CIVIL DEFENCE FIRE APPARATUS 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 211 of 1348 

 

2.8.3.  Commercial Villa (Group of Villas/ Housing Development) 
 

a. 

For cluster housing developments (with shared communal facilities) fire engine 
accessway with a minimum 6 m width shall be provided to within a travel dis-
tance of 60 m from every point on the projected plan area of any building in the 
housing developments. See Figure 2.10. for illustrations. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.8.4. 
 

 
 

Figure 2.10: Maximum distance from Fire Access from most remote Residential Unit 

Lowrise (Buildings with height less than 15 m) 

a. 

For Lowrise buildings not exceeding the habitable height of 15 m, accessway will 
not be required. However, provision of fire engine access road having minimum 6 
m width for Fire appliance will be required to within a travel distance of 45m of 
every point on the projected plan area of the building. See Figure 2.11. 

Figure 2.11: Maximum distance from Fire Access from most remote Lowrise building 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 212 of 1348 

2.8.5.  Midrise buildings (Having height more than 15 m but less than 23 m and not Sprin-

kler protected) 

 

a. 

For Midrise buildings exceeding the habitable height of 15 m, accessway shall be 
provided. Accessway shall be provided based on the gross floor area (including 
toilets, stores, circulation areas, etc.) of the building footprint projected onto 
ground level.  For Midrise buildings without Sprinkler protection, the extent of 
Fire access shall be as shown in Table 2.3. 

Table 2.3: Extent of Fire Vehicle Access for Midrise buildings without Sprinklers 

AREA OF NON SPRINKLERED MIDRISE BUILDINGS  

EXTENT OF FIRE ACCESS 

Less than 2000 m2 

2000 m2 to 4000 m2 

4001 m2 to 8000 m2 

8001 m2 to 16,000 m2 

More than 16,000 m2 

Minimum of 1/6 perimeter (At least 15 m) 

1/4 perimeter 

1/2 perimeter 

3/4 perimeter 

Whole perimeter (100%) 

 

2.8.6.  Midrise and Highrise buildings (Buildings having height 15 m to 90 m and Sprinkler 

protected) 

 

a. 

For Midrise and Highrise buildings exceeding the habitable height of 15 m, access-
way shall be provided. Accessway shall be provided based on the gross floor area 
(including toilets, stores, circulation areas, etc.) of the of the building footprint 
projected onto ground level.  For Midrise and Highrise buildings with Sprinkler 
protection, the extent of Fire access shall be as shown in Table 2.4. 

Table 2.4: Extent of Fire Vehicle Access for Midrise and Highrise buildings with Sprinklers 

AREA OF SPRINKLERED MIDRISE AND HIGHRISE 
BUILDINGS  

EXTENT OF FIRE ACCESS 

Less than 4000 m2 

4001 m2 to 8000 m2 

8001 m2 to 16,000 m2 

Photo Caption 
16,001 m2 to 32,000 m2 
 

More than 32,000 m2 

Minimum of 1/6 perimeter (At least 15 m) 

1/4 perimeter 

1/2 perimeter 

3/4 perimeter 

Whole perimeter (100%) 

b.  Where highrise buildings are situated on the podiums, parking structures, archi-
tectural features with the tower façade more than 30 m of horizontal separation 
distance away from the fire access road, following shall apply to such highrise 
buildings, 

b.1.    Fire access road shall extend and reach the highrise tower perimeter above 
the podium. Such access shall be a minimum of ¼ (25 percent) of the tower 
perimeter and in compliance to UAE Fire and Life Safety Code of Practice 
2017, chapter 2. Fire Service vehicle and personnel accessibility specifica-
tions. 

b.2.    Building façade shall comply with Chapter 2, Section 2.8.10., b.1. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 213 of 1348 

 
2.8.7.  Super Highrise buildings (Buildings having height more than 90 m), Malls, Theme 

Parks 

 

a. 

For Super Highrise buildings, Malls and Theme Parks, accessway shall be provided. 
Accessway shall be provided irrespective of the area or height. The extent of Fire 
access shall be as per Table 2.5. but not less than as required in Table 2.3 or Table 
2.4. 

Table 2.5: Extent of Fire Vehicle Access for Superhighrise, Malls and Theme Parks buildings  

SUPERHIGHRISE, MALLS, THEME PARKS 

EXTENT OF FIRE ACCESS 

Any Area or Height 

3/4 perimeter 

 

 
b.  Where superhighrise buildings are situated on the podiums, parking structures, 
architectural features with the tower façade more than 30 m of horizontal sepa-
ration distance away from the fire access road, following shall apply to such su-
perhighrise buildings, 

b.1.    Fire access road shall extend and reach the superhighrise tower perimeter 
above the podium. Such access shall be a minimum of ¼ (25 percent) of the 
tower perimeter and in compliance to UAE Fire and Life Safety Code of 
Practice 2017, chapter 2. Fire Service vehicle and personnel accessibility 
specifications. 

b.2.    Building façade shall comply with Chapter 2, Section 2.8.10., b.1. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 214 of 1348 
2.8.8.  Storage and Industrial buildings without Sprinkler Protection 
 

a. 

For all industrial and storage occupancies, accessway shall be provided for fire 
fighting appliances. The provision of accessway shall be calculated based on the 
following gross cubical extent of the building. For Non-sprinklered industrial and 
storage buildings, Fire access shall be provided as per Table 2.6. 

 

Table 2.6: Extent of Fire Vehicle Access for Industrial and Storage buildings without Sprinklers 

VOLUME OF NON SPRINKLERED INDUSTRIAL AND 
STORAGE BUILDINGS 

EXTENT OF FIRE ACCESS 

Less than 28,400 m3 

28,4001 m3 to 56,800 m3 

56,801 m3 to 85,200 m3 

85,201 m3 to 113,600 m3 

More than 113,600 m3 

Minimum of 1/6 perimeter (At least 15 m) 

1/4 perimeter 

1/2 perimeter 

3/4 perimeter 

Whole perimeter (100%) 

 
 
2.8.9.  Storage and Industrial buildings with Sprinkler Protection 
 

a. 

For all industrial and storage occupancies, accessway shall be provided for fire 
fighting appliances. The provision of accessway shall be calculated based on the 
following gross cubical extent of the building. For sprinklered industrial and stor-
age buildings, Fire access shall be provided as per Table 2.7. 

Table 2.7: Extent of Fire Vehicle Access for Industrial and Storage buildings with Sprinklers 

VOLUME OF SPRINKLERED INDUSTRIAL AND 
STORAGE BUILDINGS 

EXTENT OF FIRE ACCESS 

 
 

Less than 56,800 m3 

56,801 m3 to 85,200 m3 

85,201 m3 to 113,600 m3 

113,001 m3 to 170,400 m2 

Photo Caption 
 

More than 170,400 m3 

 
 

Minimum of 1/6 perimeter (At least 15 m) 

1/4 perimeter 

1/2 perimeter 

3/4 perimeter 

Whole perimeter (100%) 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 215 of 1348 

 

 
 
 

 
 

Figure 2.12: 1/6 perimeter Fire Access 

Figure 2.13: 1/4 perimeter Fire Access 

Figure 2.14: 1/2 perimeter Fire Access 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 216 of 1348 

 

 
2.8.10.  Waterfront Properties 
 

a. 

For all water front properties, the fire access road shall comply with this chapter 
and Table 2.8. 

Table 2.8: Extent of Fire Vehicle Access for Waterfront Properties 

OCCUPANCY 

EXTENT OF FIRE ACCESS 

Commercial Villas 

Lowrise buildings 

Highrise buildings 

Maximum distance from Fire access road shall 
not exceed 60 m 

Maximum distance from Fire access road shall 
not exceed 60 m 

Shall comply with Table 2.3 and Table 2.4. of 
this chapter 

Superhighrise buildings 

Shall comply with Table 2.5. of this chapter 

b.  Where the water front properties, the fire access road does not comply with Sec-
tion 2.8.10.a., the Section 2.8.10. b.1.  and Section 2.8.10. b.2. shall apply to such 
properties. 

 

 

b.1.  Building Facade 

b.1.1. Façade system shall comply with UAE Fire and Life Safety Code of 

Practice 2017, chapter 1, Section 4. However, materials and materi-
al test requirements of Chapter 1, section 4 shall be superseded with 
the Chapter 2, Section 2.8.10. b.1.  

b.1.2. Façade material shall comprise of non-combustible cladding and non

-combustible insulation materials such as below.  

i.     Natural stones, masonry, brick, terra cotta, ceramics. 

ii.    Non-composite solid metals such as aluminium, steel, stainless 
steel, copper, titanium, factory painted (<0.3 mm thick) metals. 

iii.   Mineral wool, cement boards, cement plaster and concrete. 

b.1.3. For cladding or insulation materials or composites not listed in 

b.1.2. that are deemed to be non-combustible, then the supplier 
shall provide test evidence and certification to show the material/
composite achieves Class A1 to fire performance test, EN 13501-1 
and shall have self-ignition temperature of not less than 3430 C when 
tested to ASTM D1929.  

b.1.4. Vapour barriers shall be aluminum foil or achieve class A2-s1-d0 to 

EN 13501-1. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 217 of 1348 

b.1.5. Where a vapour barrier does not meet the requirement of b.1.4., 

then the façade system(s) proposed for the project including the 
vapour barrier shall be required to pass the large scale façade tests 
in accordance with UAE Fire and Life Safety Code of Practice 2017, 
Chapter 1, Section 4. 

 

b.2. 

Fire Access Road 

b.2.1. Minimum of ¼ (25 percent) of the building perimeter shall have fire 
access road in compliance to UAE Fire and Life Safety Code of Prac-

tice 2017, chapter 2. Fire Service vehicle and personnel accessibility 

specifications. 

b.2.2. Fire truck staging area of 6 m wide and 12 m long shall be provided 

in compliance to UAE Fire and Life Safety Code of Practice 2017, 
chapter 2. Fire Service vehicle and personnel accessibility specifica-
tions. 

b.2.3. All the water front properties which have only  ¼ (25 percent) of the 

required Primary Fire access road in accordance with Section 
2.8.10.a., a secondary fire access road, in accordance with  the fol-
lowing shall be provided. 

i.  4.5 m wide, secondary fire access road shall be provided at the 

entire water side of the property. 

ii.   The secondary fire access road load carrying capacity shall not 

be less than 40,000 kg. 

iii.   Except for b.2.3.i and b.2.3.ii., the secondary fire access road 

shall comply with UAE Fire and Life Safety Code of Practice 2017, 
chapter 2. Fire Service vehicle and personnel accessibility speci-
fications. 

 
 

 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 218 of 1348 

 

2.9.  Access into the building for Fire Fighters 

 

2.9.1.  At fire service access level, Civil Defence vehicles shall be able to approach and park to 
within 15 m and within sight of a suitable entrance which gives access to the Interior of 
the Building, a Firefighting Lift and associated staircases. 

 
2.9.2.  Breeching inlets should be visible from fire engine parking to avoid delay in locating 

them upon arrival of the fire crew. For better response, the distance from Fire vehicle 
parking to breeching inlet is limited to one hose length, 18m.  

 
2.9.3.  Emergency Command Center 

a.  An Emergency Command Centre as per Chapter 1, shall be provided in any build-

ing which is ‘Highrise’ with building height of 23 m, in Malls and Amusement Parks 
and Superhighrise buildings, having height more than 90 m. 

 
b. 

c. 

 
d. 

Emergency Command Center essentially shall be on the building front side, along 
the Fire Accessway. Fire Command Centers at below grade or above discharge 
level are not acceptable. 

  

The fire command center shall be separated from the remainder of the building 
by not less than a 1-hour fire barrier constructed in accordance with Chapter 1. 

Fire Command Center shall be a minimum of 19 m2  with minimum dimension of  
3 m on any side. The entrance to the Command Center shall be on the exterior of 
the building along the Fire Accessway. Where such an entrance is not feasible, 
Fire Command center shall be at the Main entrance lobby of the building. 

 
e.  Mechanical Ventilation, as per Chapter 10, shall be provided for the Command 

Center. 

 
f. 
 

An Emergency Command Centre shall be equipped with following features. 

i. 

Schematic building plans indicating the typical floor plan and detailing the 
building core, means of egress, fire protection systems, fire-fighting equip-
ment and fire department access and the location of fire walls, fire barriers, 
fire partitions, smoke barriers and smoke partitions. etc. 
The emergency voice evacuation alarm communication system control unit. 

ii. 
iii.  Two-Way fire department communications system. 
iv.  Fire detection and alarm system annunciator. 
v.  Annunciator unit visually indicating the location of the elevators and wheth-

er they are operational. 

Chapter 10 for smoke control systems installed in the building. 

vi.  Status indicators and controls for HVAC and air distribution systems. 
vii.  The fire-fighter’s control panel, Smoke Control Panel (SCP) required by  
 
viii.  Access Control Systems schematic and Controls for unlocking stairway doors. 
ix.  Fire pump status indicators. 
x. 
xi.  Emergency and standby power/Generator status indicators and manual start 

Sprinkler valve and waterflow detector display panels. 

and transfer features. 
xii.  Public Address system. 
xiii.  Work table. 
xiv.  Elevator fire recall switch.  

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 219 of 1348 

 

2.9.4. Fire Lift 

a.  At least one Fire Lift in a dedicated shaft, as required by Chapter 1, Table 1.9.38. shall be 

provided in any building which is ‘Highrise’ with 23 m or more in height, ‘High Depth’ with 
more than 2 basements, Malls and multi storey Amusement Parks. Additional lifts may 
share the same shaft, provided all the lifts comply with same degree of protection and fea-
tures as the fire lift. 

 

b.  Minimum dimension of a Fire Lift car shall be adequate to accommodate an ambulance 
stretcher of 610 mm by 2134 mm with not less than 127 mm radius corners, in the hori-
zontal, open position. 

 
c.  The fire lift shall have access to every habitable floors within the building. In Super Highrise 
buildings having height more than 90 m from Fire access level, the fire lift shall be adjacent 
and accessible to an exit staircase and a fire fighting lobby at each storey as required by 
Chapter 1, Table 1.9.38.  and shown in Figure  2.15. 

  Where a fire lift has a second entrance onto a floor, the second entrance is not required to 

open into a 1 hour lobby. 
 

d.  Fire lift shall be provided with an operational feature that would enable firemen to over-
ride earlier call which had been inadvertently made to the fire lift during an emergency. 

 

e.  This operational feature could be built into the lift control system or alternatively a sepa-
rate by-pass switch could be provided. If the operational feature is built into the lift con-
trol, it is not mandatory to provide a separate by-pass switch. 

 
f.  A service lift mainly intended for the transport of goods, such as freight elevators shall not 
be designated as a fire lift. However, a fire lift complying to this section can be utilized for 
everyday function, such as passenger lifts or service lifts. Likewise, a service lift which com-
plies with all the requirements of a fire lift as per this section, shall be permitted to be con-
sidered as a ‘Fire Lift’. 

 
g.  The power supply to the lift shall be connected to a sub-main circuit exclusive to the lift 

and independent of any other main or sub-main circuit.  
 

h.  Wires or cables that provide normal and standby power, control signals, communication 
with the car, lighting, heating, air-conditioning, ventilation, and fire detecting systems to 
fire lift shall be protected by construction having a minimum 1-hour fire resistance rating 
or shall be circuit integrity cable having a minimum 1-hour fire resistance rating. 

 
i. 

In a fire emergency when a fire detection devices or fire alarm systems is activated, if the 
ground floor is compromised with fire, all the passenger lifts shall be brought to the 
ground floor or egress level or alternative floor. Furthermore lift doors shall remain open. 

 

j.  Every Fire Lift shall be equipped with 2-way communication devices to be used by Fire 

fighters during emergencies. 

 
k.  Where elevators are used for evacuation, such elevators shall have features as per Chapter 

3, Section 3.9. 
 

l.     All fire lifts must be provided with water management, Protection of electrical equipment 

against water, Control and power supplies, and Civil Defence Communications systems in 
accordance with sections 5.3 and 5.6-5.12 of  BS EN 81-72 current edition.  

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 220 of 1348 

2.9.5.  Fire Lift Lobby (Fire Man’s Lift Lobby) 

a.  All Super highrise buildings (Having height greater than 90 m from the Fire access 

level) shall have “Fire Fighter’s Lift Lobby” as per Chapter 1., Table 1.9.38. See 
figure 2.15. The fire lift lobby shall be enclosed with a smoke barrier having a min-
imum 1-hour fire-resistance rating. 

 
b.  Before a fire can be fought by fire-fighters, they need a dedicated space  where 

they gather their equipment such as lengths of hose, branches, door opening 
tools etc., before advancing to fight the fire. This requirement shall be fulfilled by 
a well defined Fire Lift Lobby where both Fire exit Stair and Fire Lift can be ac-
cessed. 

c.  The fire fighting lobby shall 

have a clear floor area of not 
less than 9 m2 with a mini-
mum dimension of 2440 mm. 

 
d.  Fire Lift Lobby shall be pro-

vided with a doorway that is 
protected with a 60 minutes 
fire door assembly. 

 
e.  The fire fighting lobby shall 

be free of combustible mate-
rials and ignition sources. 

f.  There are no requirements 
for the Fire Lift lobby or the 
fire lift shaft to be pressur-
ized when fire lift lobby ac-
cording to this section is pro-
vided. 

 

 

Figure 2.15: Fire Man’s Lift Lobby  

2.9.6.  Fire Exit Stair 

a. 

 
b. 

2 Hour rated Fire Exit enclosure shall be available for the fire fighters to access 
the interior and upper floors of the building. Such exit stair shall be fully enclosed 
smoke proof space. The number of such Stairs shall be governed by Chapter 3 and 
construction shall comply with Chapter 1. 

Fire Exit Stair shall connect every habitable floor of the building and not less than 
one stair shall provide access to the roof where LPG Tanks are located. 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 221 of 1348 

 

2.10. Access to Fire Fighting Equipment for Fire Fighters 

2.10.1. Yard Hydrant System 

 

a.  Consideration should be given to establish Public Fire Hydrant System as part of UAE 

infrastructure. UAE Municipality should stress on provision of Public Fire Hydrant 
System at all upcoming developments. Civil Defence makes it mandatory to provide 
Yard Fire Hydrants in all developments. 

 

b.  Yard Fire Hydrants shall be available for the Fire Fighters which essentially should be 
located along the Fire Accessway. These Yard Fire Hydrants are used by Fire fighters 
either to refill the Fire vehicle water tank or fight Fire using the hose connection 
from the Hydrants. 

c. 

Such Yard Fire Hydrants shall be capable of delivering  500 gpm (US Gallons per mi-
nute) through a single Hydrant with two outlets, i.e.,  250 gpm per outlet shall be 
available. 

 

 

d.  Minimum Pressure required for Private fire hydrant is 6.9 bars.  
 
e. 
 
f. 

Two such Hydrants shall be considered for the Hydraulic calculations. 

The design, calculations, Pipe sizes, Pump and Tank Capacities, Test requirements, 
distance between Hydrants, Material requirements etc. shall comply with Chapter 9, 
Fire Protection Systems. 

 

 

Photo Caption 
 

Figure 2.16.: Distance from furthest point of private fire engine accessway to a public hydrant  

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 222 of 13482.10.2. Breeching Inlets (Civil Defence connections) 
 

a.  Breeching inlet (Fire department connections) shall be located on the street side of 
the buildings, near the building entrance and on the Fire Accessway. Breeching inlet 
shall be within 18 m from the Fire vehicle parking slot. 

 

 
 

b.  These breeching inlet connections shall be located and arranged such that hose lines 
can be readily and conveniently attached to the inlets without interference from any 
nearby objects, including buildings, fences, posts, trees or other fire department con-
nections. 
 

c.  Breeching inlets shall consist of  
 

i.  Four 65 mm, (4-Way) direct coupling type fitting for wet riser. 
ii.  Two 65 mm, (2-Way) direct coupling type fitting for Sprinkler Riser. 
iii.  Two 65 mm, (2-Way) direct coupling type fitting for Dry riser. 

 
d.  Breeching inlets shall be equipped with caps to protect the system from the entry of 

debris. 

 
e. 

 
f. 

 

 

Fire department connections shall be located not less than 457 mm nor more than 
1219 mm above the finished ground level. 

Each breeching inlet connection to Sprinkler/Wet riser/Dry riser systems shall be 
clearly designated by a sign as follows: 

i.  The sign shall have raised or engraved letters at least 25.4 mm in height on a 

plate or fitting. 

ii.  The sign shall be both in English and Arabic indicating the service for which the 

connection is intended and shall read, for example, as follows: 

   

 

  WATER TANK / SPRINKLER / WETRISER / DRYRISER  

The design, calculations, Pipe and fitting sizes, Material requirements etc. shall com-
ply with Chapter 9, Breeching inlets (Civil Defence connections) 

g. 

 

2.10.3.  Fire Hose Cabinet (FHC) 
 

a. 

Fire Hose Cabinets  (Hose Stations) complying to Chapter 9, shall be available in all 
buildings for Fire Fighters. 

Points to Ponder 

Consideration should be given to the provision of two sets of breeching inlets at 

two separate and remote locations so that Fire Fighters have optional safe loca-

tion to pump the water when one location is compromised by Fire, Smoke, falling 

flaming debris, melting Façade debris etc. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 223 of 1348 

b. 

 
c. 

Fire Hose Cabinets (FHC) shall be installed and clearly visible next to exit Stair and distrib-
uted in the corridors and circulation areas, in every floor of the building, designed and 
installed in accordance with Chapter 9. 

Fire Hose Cabinets (FHC) shall be within 6 m from Stair door. FHC shall not be located in-
side the stair core. Installation of landing valve alone in the stair is not permitted as an 
alternative to the fire hose cabinet. FHC shall be an assembly as an unit as required by 
2.9.3.f.  

d.  Fire Hose Cabinets shall be available  

on both sides of “Horizontal Exits” 
next to the door. 

 
e.  Fire Hose Cabinets shall be available  
on the Roof where LPG Tanks, Air con-
ditioning equipment, Heaters or Gym-
nasium are located. 

 
f.  Fire Hose Cabinets shall consist of the 

following. 

 

 

i.  65 mm Landing Valve  outlet. 
ii.  40/25 mm outlet with Hose Reel/

Hose Rack. 

iii.  CO2 Fire Extinguisher. 
iv.  Dry Chemical Powder Fire Extin-

guisher. 

v.  65mm, 30 m Fire Hose with  noz-

zle. 

Figure 2.17: Typical Fire Hose Cabinet  

 
 

2.10.4.  Fire Pump Room 
 

a. 

Fire Pump Room, irrespective of its location, shall be accessible for Fire fighters. A 
clear visual layout showing location and way to Pump room shall be posted in the 
Emergency Command Center and Reception. 

 
b.  Pump Room shall be dedicated fire pump room housing the Main Electrical Fire 

Pump, Standby Diesel Fire Pump, Jockey Pump, Controller, Diesel fuel tank  etc., as 
required by Chapter 9, Fire Protection Systems. 

 
c. 

 

Pump Room shall have sufficient space around the installations to access the valves, 
Controllers and gauges. 

2.10.5.  Smoke Control Panel (SCP) 
 

a. 

Smoke Control Panel (As designed, installed and required by Chapter 10, Smoke 
Control Systems) shall be accessible for Fire fighters.  

 
b.  A clear visual layout showing location of Smoke Control Equipment, their intended 

function and manual switches shall be available for fire fighters at the Command 
Center or at constantly manned location where Smoke Control Panel is installed. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 224 of 1348 

3.   Fire Access for Civil Defence Fireboats  

3.1.  Intention 

3.1.1.  The Requirements of Fire Access for Civil Defence Fire Boats are to address the follow-

ing. 
 

3.1.1.1.  Many projects in UAE are on marinas with water front and without compli-
ant Fire Access Road. Civil Defence has included Fire Boats in its fleet to ad-
dress fires in water front buildings, marinas and creek boats. 

 
3.1.1.2.  The requirements of this section shall provide the guidelines for docking fa-

cilities, dimensions and the access of Civil Defence from water front.  
 

3.2.  Access for Fire Boats from water front 

3.2.1.  Fire access for Civil Defence Fire Boats shall be provided on all water front develop-
ments such that Fire Boats can approach these developments from waterside. This 
provision shall be made irrespective of Fire Access Road available on land. 

 
3.2.2.  A dedicated Berth measuring 15 m long and 5 m wide shall be provided for the Fire 

Boat for docking during emergencies. 

Table 2.9: Fire Access specifications for Fire Boats 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.2.3.  There shall be Mooring facility  complete with approved ropes, fixed fittings on the 

Minimum  Unobstructed vertical clearance 

Minimum Unobstructed Length 

Minimum  Unobstructed Width 

BERTH REQUIREMENTS 

STANDARD FIRE 
BOAT 

15 m 

5 m 

6 m 

deck and platform. 

 
3.2.4.  The mooring bitt or cleats shall be corrosion resistant and secured to a foundation that 

is tied into an underdeck structure and is of adequate strength to carry the mooring 
loads. 

 

Photo Caption 
 

3.2.5. 

This docking facility shall be  
within 45 m from any building 
and structure to be attended to, 
on the shore. 

 
 
 
 
 

CIVIL DEFENCE BOATS AT DUBAI CREEK FOR ILLUSTRATION 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 225 of 1348 

4.   Civil Defence Fire Apparatus specifications  

4.1.  Fire Vehicles 

4.1.1.  First Responder Vehicle (4X4 SUV) 

 

 
 

 
 
4.1.2.  First Responder Vehicle (4X4 PICKUP) 
 

Table 2.10: First Responder Vehicle  

VEHICLE ITEMS 

SPECIFICATIONS 

Length 

Width 

Height 

Weight 

Wheel Base 

5500 mm 

2000 mm 

2000 mm 

2700 kg 

3300 mm 

Table 2.11.: First Responder Vehicle  

VEHICLE ITEMS 

SPECIFICATIONS 

Length 

Width 

Height 

Weight 

Wheel Base 

7500 mm 

2400 mm 

2400 mm 

8500 kg 

4500 mm 

 
 
4.1.3.  Medium Firefighting Vehicle (4X4, 4000 L WATER, 400 L FOAM) 

Photo Caption 
 

 

Table 2.12.: Medium Vehicle  

VEHICLE ITEMS 

SPECIFICATIONS 

Length 

Width 

Height 

Weight 

7200 mm 

2500 mm 

3800 mm 

15000 kg 

Front Axial Load 

6100 kg 

Rear Axial Load 

10500 kg 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 226 of 1348 

4.   Civil Defence Fire Apparatus specifications 

4.1.4.  Off Road Vehicle (4X4 5000 L WATER) 

 

Table 2.13.: Off Road Vehicle  

VEHICLE ITEMS 

SPECIFICATIONS 

Length 

Width 

Height 

Weight 

6800 mm 

2500 mm 

3500 mm 

14,100 kg 

Front Axial Load 

6200 kg 

Rear Axial Load 

8500 kg 

 
4.1.5.  Water Tanker Vehicle (6X4, 18,000 L WATER) 
 
 

Table 2.14.: Water Tanker  

VEHICLE ITEMS 

SPECIFICATIONS 

Length 

Width 

Height 

Weight 

9000 mm 

2500 mm 

3800 mm 

30,000 kg 

Front Axial Load 

9000 kg 

Rear Axial Load 

26,000 kg 

Table 2.15.: Pulling Tractor  

VEHICLE ITEMS 

SPECIFICATIONS 

Length 

Width 

Height 

6800 mm 

2500 mm 

3500 mm 

Permitted Weight 

38,000 kg 

Wheel Base 

3300 mm 

 
 
4.1.6.  Pulling Tractor (6x4) 

Photo Caption 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 227 of 1348 

4.   Civil Defence Fire Apparatus specifications 

4.1.7.  Water Tanker Trailer (10,000 US GAL. WATER) 

 

Table 2.16.: Water Tank Trailer  

VEHICLE ITEMS 

SPECIFICATIONS 

Length 

Width 

Height 

Weight 

12,500 mm 

2500 mm 

3500 mm 

36,000 kg 

 
 
 
4.1.8.  Aerial Telescopic Platform (42-46 METERS, 8x4) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Table 2.17.: Aerial Telescopic Platform  

VEHICLE ITEMS 

SPECIFICATIONS 

Length 

Width 

Height 

Weight 

10,160 mm 

2500 mm 

3700 mm 

26,000 kg 

Front Axial Load 

8000 kg 

 
 
 
4.1.9.  Aerial Telescopic Platform (54-56 METERS, 8x4) 

Rear Axial Load 

18,000 kg 

Photo Caption 
 

 

Table 2.18.: Aerial Telescopic Platform  

VEHICLE ITEMS 

SPECIFICATIONS 

Length 

Width 

Height 

Weight 

12,000 mm 

2500 mm 

4000 mm 

40,000 kg 

Front Axial Load 

15,000 Kg 

Rear Axial Load 

2x13,000 kg 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 228 of 1348 

4.   Civil Defence Fire Apparatus specifications 

4.1.10.  Turntable Ladder (37-39 METERS) 

 
4.1.11.  Pick up with Crane, 7.5 Ton  

Table 2.19.: Turntable Ladder  

VEHICLE ITEMS 

SPECIFICATIONS 

Length 

Width 

Height 

Weight 

10,000 mm 

2500 mm 

3500 mm 

19,000 kg 

Front Axial Load 

8000 kg 

Rear Axial Load 

11,000 kg 

Table 2.20.: Pick up with Crane  

VEHICLE ITEMS 

SPECIFICATIONS 

Length 

Width 

Height 

Weight 

6500 mm 

2000 mm 

3700 mm 

7,500 kg 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
4.1.12.  Bus, 26 Seater  

Photo Caption 
 

Table 2.21.: Bus  

VEHICLE ITEMS 

SPECIFICATIONS 

Length 

Width 

Height 

Weight 

6200 mm 

2050 mm 

2500 mm 

4000 kg 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 229 of 1348 

4.   Civil Defence Fire Apparatus specifications  

 

4.2.  Fireboats 

 
4.2.1.  Fire Storm (34 FEET) 

Photo Caption 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Table 2.22.: Fire Storm 

VEHICLE ITEMS 

SPECIFICATIONS 

Length 

Width 

Height 

10,360 mm 

3206 mm 

5000 mm 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 230 of 1348 

4.   Civil Defence Fire Apparatus specifications 

4.2.2.  Fire Storm (46 FEET) 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Table 2.23.: Fire Storm 

VEHICLE ITEMS 

SPECIFICATIONS 

Length 

Width 

Height 

14,016 mm 

4372 mm 

5000 mm 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 231 of 1348 

5.   Fire Station  

5.1.  Intention 

It is the practice of Civil Defence to respond to any fire emergency in the country  
within 8 minutes of receiving emergency call. 

5.1.1. 
 
 
5.1.1.  The above mentioned vision can only be fulfilled by having well equipped Fire stations 

throughout the cities, developments and industrial zones such that each area can be 
reached within 8 minutes during fire emergencies. 

 
5.1.1.  This section conveys briefly the Fire station requirements to be implemented when 

Civil Defence demands Fire Stations to be built in new developments. 

 

5.2.  Necessity of a Fire Station 

5.2.1.  Necessity of a Fire Station to cover any locality shall be decided by the Civil Defence. 

Every developers and builders shall coordinate with Civil Defence during planning 
stage to confirm and verify the need for Fire Station 
to be built in their developments. 

Did You Know? 

 
5.2.2.  The necessity of a Fire Station, along with ambition 

of responding to emergencies within 4 minutes, 
also depends on the Risk category of a particular 
region. This Risk analysis is carried out by the Civil 
Defence based on developer’s submission of his 
project details. 

 
5.2.3.  Such project details shall include the following. 
 

It is the vision of Civil 

Defence to achieve the 

emergency response 

time from 8 minutes to 4 

minutes by  year 2020 

 

a.  Satellite Map of the region 
b.  Setting out plans showing nature of buildings and occupancies. 
c.  Location of nearest Civil Defence Fire Station to the development. 
d. 

Information about special Risks to be considered such as involvement of explosive, 
hazardous and flammable material, Culturally high value structures, Historic build-
ings, critical infrastructure facilities etc. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CIVIL DEFENCE 

TYPICAL CIVIL DEFENCE FIRE STATION 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 232 of 1348 

 

5.3.  Design 

5.3.1.  Fire station designs vary depending on the category of a fire station. 
 
5.3.2.  Categories of Fire station shall depend on Risk assessment of the locality that it caters 
to and the detailed information about the Fire apparatus that  to be accommodated. 

 
5.3.3.  The fire stations are occupied at all times housing Fire fighters. Ensuring their comfort, 

safety and well being is of high importance. 
 
The following design intent shall be considered for an effective fire station. 

 
 
 

Internal response time (Dispatch time) 

a. 
b.  Clear distinction between residential space and work space. 
c.  Ease and quick access between Residential, Vehicle bay, training, administrative, 

maintenance and recreational spaces. 

 
5.3.4.  The Fire station functional areas shall include the following but not limited to, 
 

a.  Control room 
b.   Enclosed Fire Apparatus Parking  
c.  Maintenance equipment/Store room. 
d.  Administrative Office room 
e.   Living room. 
f.    Bedroom. 
g.   Washroom with shower 
h.   Locker room 
i.    Kitchen 
j.    Pump room 
k.   Water Tank 

 
5.3.5.  The bedroom sizes, number of beds, living room sizes, fire apparatus enclosed parking 

sizes, equipment, Control room features, water tank and fire apparatus refilling fea-
tures and requirements shall be discussed and confirmed with approval from Civil De-
fence Operation department. 

5.3.6.  The roads and turning facilities, the surface finish etc. shall comply with Section 2.2. 

and Table 2.1. of this chapter. 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

TYPI-

CIVIL DE-

THEME BASED FIRE STATION AT DUBAI PARKS FOR ILLUSTRATION 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 233 of 1348 

5.3.7.  Refer to Figure 2.18. for a sample Fire station floor plan. 
 
5.3.8.  Fire station design shall be approved by Civil Defence Operation Department. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

Figure 2.18: Sample floor plan of a Fire Station  

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 234 of 1348Chapter 3 
MEANS OF EGRESS 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 235 of 1348In this Chapter :

 Specification for exits, stairs, exit access, exit corridors, exit discharge

  Doors, handrails, locks and latches, and access Control

   Travel distances, dead ends, common-paths, and occupant Loads

  Single exit allowance 

Intent of the Chapter 

• 

• 

Provide adequate number of exits and corridors, restrict travel distances and 
provide building features such that people can carry out evacuation efficiently 
to point of safety, out of the building. 

To enable designers to consider floor plans and exit widths that can accommodate 
people movement and evacuation fluently as per required occupant loads. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 236 of 1348 

In this Chapter : 

  Specification for Exits, Stairs, Exit 

Access, Exit Corridors, Exit Discharge. 

  Doors, Handrails, Locks and Latches, 

Access Control. 

  Travel Distances, Dead Ends, 

Commonpaths, Occupant Loads. 

Intent of the Chapter 

  Provide adequate number of Exits and corridors, restrict 
travel distances and provide building features such that 
people can carry out evacuation efficiently to point of 
safety, out of the building. 

  To enable designers to consider floor plans and exit widths 

that can accommodate people movement and evacuation 
fluently as per required Occupant Loads.  

  Single Exit Allowance 

 

1. Definitions 

1.1.  Means of Egress 
 

1.1.1.  Shall  

 

 

 

It is a mandatory requirement from Civil Defence 

1.1.2.  Should 

It is a suggested requirement recommended by Civil Defence but not mandatory. 

1.1.3.  Listed 

Approved and registered by individual Emirates’ Civil Defence material department. 

1.1.4.  Means of Egress 

A continuous and unobstructed way of travel from any point in a building or structure 
to a public way consisting of three separate and distinct parts: (1) the exit access, (2) 
the exit, and (3) the exit discharge. 
 

1.1.5.  Means of Escape  

A way out of a building or structure that does not conform to the strict definition of 
means of egress but does provide an alternate way out. 
 

1.1.6.  Exit Access 

That portion of a means of egress that leads to an exit. 

 
1.1.7.  Exit 

That portion of a means of egress that is separated from all other spaces of the of 
building or structure by  construction, location or equipment as required to provide a 
protected way of travel from Exit access to the exit discharge. 

 
1.1.8.  Exit Discharge 

That portion of a means of egress between the termination of an exit and a public 
way. 
 

1.1.9.  Level of Exit Discharge.  

The storey or level where required number of the building exits discharge to outside 
to finished ground level.  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 237 of 1348 

1.1.10.  Horizontal Exit 

A way of passage from one building to an area of refuge in another building on ap-
proximately the same level, or a way of passage through or around a fire barrier to an 
area of refuge on approximately the same level in the same building that affords safe-
ty from fire and smoke originating from the area of incidence and areas communi-
cating therewith. 
 

1.1.11.  Accessible Means of Egress  

A continuous and unobstructed means of egress that provides an accessible route to a 
public way. 

 
1.1.12.  Exit Enclosure  

An Exit component that is separated from other spaces of a building or structure by 
fire resistance rated construction and opening protective, providing a protected path 
of egress travel in a vertical or horizontal direction to exit discharge or public way or 
outside building. 
 

1.1.13.  Exit Passageway  

An Exit component that is separated from other spaces of a building or structure by 
fire resistance rated construction and opening protective, providing a protected path 
of egress travel in a horizontal direction to exit discharge or public way or outside 
building. Additional uses for the exit passageway include stair transfer in upper floors 
as well as to reduce travel distance to an exit by having an exit passageway lead to a 
stair of exit discharge. 
 

1.1.14.  Exit Corridor 
 

An Exit component that may or may not be separated from other spaces of a building 
or structure by fire resistance rated construction and opening protective, providing a  
path of egress travel in a horizontal direction to exit or exit passageway. 

 
1.1.15.  Exit Access Doorway  

A door or access point along the exit path from an occupied room, area or space 
where the path of egress enters room, corridor, unenclosed exit access stair or unen-
closed exit access ramp. 
 

1.1.16.  Aisle Accessway 

The initial portion of an exit access that leads to an aisle. 
 

1.1.17.  Aisle Ramp 

A ramp within a seating area of an assembly occupancy that directly serves rows of 
seating to the side of the ramp. 
 

1.1.18.  Egress Court 

A court or yard which provided access to a public way for one or more Exits. 
 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 238 of 1348 

1.1.19.  Public Way 

A street , alley or other portion of land open to the outside air leading to a street, usu-
ally government property, that has been permanently dedicated to the public for pub-
lic use and which has clear width and height of not less than 3 m. 
 

1.1.20.  Ramp 

A walking surface that has a running slope steeper than 5% slope. 
 

1.1.21.  Smokeproof Enclosure 

An enclosure designed to limit the entry and movement of products of combustion 
produced by a fire. 
 

1.1.22.  Lobby 

An entrance or foyer in a building. 
 

1.1.23.  Elevator Lobby.  

A landing from which occupants directly enter an elevator car(s) and into which occu-
pants directly enter upon leaving an elevator car(s). 
 

1.1.24.  Vestibule   

A small room next to an exit stair door and connecting it with the interior of the build-
ing. 
 

1.1.25.  Storey 

The portion of a building located between the upper surface of a floor and the upper 
surface of the floor or roof next above. 
 

1.1.26.  Storeys in Height.  

The storey count starting with the level of exit discharge and ending with the highest 
occupiable storey height containing the occupancy considered. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 239 of 1348 

 

1.2.  Stair 

 

1.2.1.  Stair 
 
 
1.2.2.  Exit Stair 
 

Change in elevation, consisting of one or more risers. 

An Exit component that is separated from other spaces of a building or structure by fire 
resistance rated construction and opening protective, providing a protected path of 
egress travel in a vertical direction to exit discharge or public way or outside building. 

 
1.2.3.  Stairway 
 

One or more flights of stairs, either exterior or interior, with necessary landings and 
platforms connecting them to form a continuous and uninterrupted passage from one 
level to another. 

 
1.2.4.  Stairway, Exterior 
 

A stairway that is open on at least one side, except for required structural columns, 
beams, handrails and guards. The adjoining open area shall be either yards, courts or 
public ways. The other sides of the exterior stairway need not be open. 

 
1.2.5.  Stairway, Interior 
 

A stairway that does not meet the requirements of exterior stairway and serves the in-
terior of the building. 

 
1.2.6.  Stairway, Spiral 
 

A stairway having a closed circular form in its plan view with uniform section-shaped 
treads attached to and radiating from a minimum-diameter supporting column. 

 
1.2.7.  Scissor Stair 
 

Two interlocking stairways providing two separate paths of egress located within one 
stairwell enclosure. 

 
1.2.8.  Aisle Stair  
 

A stair within a seating area of an assembly occupancy that directly serves rows of seats 
to the side of the stair, including transition stairs that connect to an aisle or a landing. 

A stepping space in a stair flight to set the foot. 

 
1.2.9.  Stair Tread 
 
 
1.2.10.  Stair Riser 
 

 
1.2.11.  Stair Landing 
 
 
1.2.12.  Handrail 
 

The near-vertical element in a set of stairs, forming the space between a step and the 
next.  

The floor area at the top of a flight of stairs or between two flights of stairs. 

A horizontal or sloping rail intended for handhold and grasping by the hand for guid-
ance or support. 

 
1.2.13.  Guard 
 

A vertical protective barrier erected along elevated walking surfaces, exposed edges of 
stairways, balconies and similar areas that minimizes the possibility of fall from elevated 
surfaces to lower level. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 240 of 13481.3.  Door 
 

1.3.1.  Door (Door Assembly) 

Any combination of a door, frame, hardware, and other accessories that is placed in 
an opening in a wall that is intended primarily for access or for human entrance or 
exit. 
 

1.3.2.  Fire Door (Fire Door Assembly) 

Any combination of a fire door, a frame, hardware, and other accessories that togeth-
er provides a specific degree of fire protection to the opening. 
 

1.3.3.  Horizontal Fire Door Assembly  

A combination of a fire door, a frame, hardware, and other accessories installed in a 
horizontal plane, which together provide a specific degree of fire protection to a 
through-opening in a fire resistance–rated floor or roof. 
 

1.3.4.  Elevator Lobby Door 

A door between an elevator lobby and another building space other than the elevator 
shaft. 
 

1.3.5.  Revolving Door 

A door, especially at the entrance of a building, typically made of three or four rigid 
leaves of upright sections joined at right angles and rotating about a central upright 
axle. 
 

1.3.6.  Panic Hardware 

A door-latching assembly incorporating an actuating member or bar that releases the 
latch bolt upon the application of a force in the direction of egress travel. 
 

1.3.7.  Fire Exit Hardware 

A type of panic hardware that additionally provides fire protection where used as part 
of a fire door assembly. 
 

1.3.8.  Actuating Member or Bar 

The activating mechanism of a panic hardware or fire exit hardware device located on 
the egress side of a door. 
 

1.3.9.  Automatic Closing Door 

A door that normally is open but that closes when the automatic-closing device is acti-
vated. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 241 of 13481.4.  Special Definitions 
 

1.4.1.  Common Path of Travel  

The portion of exit access that must be traversed before two separate and distinct 
paths of travel to two exits are available. 
 

1.4.2.  Travel Distance to Exits 

The portion of exit access that must be traversed before reaching an exit, which is 
measured along the natural path of travel on the floor or walking surface. 
 

1.4.3.  Dead end corridor 

The portion of corridor that when traversed leads to no exit at the end that portion 
has to be traversed back to get to reach a choice of exits and is measured along the 
natural path of travel, on the floor or walking surface. 
 

1.4.4.  Occupant Load 

The total number of persons that might occupy a building or portion thereof at any 
one time for whom number of exits and widths of such exits needs to be designed. 
 

1.4.5.  Occupant Load Factor 

A designation of square meters per person based upon the use of a given space. It is 
used to determine occupant load by dividing the occupant load factor from the over-
all square meters of an area. 
The occupant load in any building or portion thereof shall be not less than the number 
of persons determined by dividing the floor area assigned to that use by the pre-
determined occupant load factor for that use. Where both gross and net area figures 
are given for the same occupancy, calculations shall be made by applying the gross 
area figure to the gross area of the portion of the building devoted to the use for 
which the gross area figure is specified and by applying the net area figure to the net 
area of the portion of the building devoted to the use for which the net area figure is 
specified. 
 

1.4.6.  Gross Floor Area 

Total floor area within the inside perimeter of the outside walls of the building under  
consideration with no deductions for hallways, stairs, closets, thickness of interior 
walls, columns, elevator and building services shafts, or other features, but excluding 
floor openings associated with atriums and communicating spaces.  

 
1.4.7.  Net Area 

The floor area within the inside perimeter of the outside walls, or the outside walls 
and fire walls of a building, or outside and/or inside walls that bound an occupancy or 
incidental use area requiring the occupant load to be calculated using net floor area 
under consideration with deductions for hallways, stairs, closets, thickness of interior 
walls, columns, or other features.  
Areas consumed by services, structural elements, shafts etc. are not included in the 
net area. 
 
 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 242 of 13481.4.  Special Definitions 
 

1.4.8.  Refuge Area 

An area that is either 
a.  A storey in a building where the building is protected throughout by an approved, 
supervised automatic sprinkler system and has not less than two accessible rooms 
or spaces separated from each other by smoke-resisting partitions. 

b.  A space located in a path of travel leading to a public way that is protected from 
the effects of fire, either by means of separation from other spaces in the same 
building or by virtue of location, thereby permitting a delay in egress travel from 
any level. 

 

1.4.9.  Elevator Evacuation System.  

A system, including a vertical series of elevator lobbies and associated elevator lobby 
doors, an elevator shaft(s), and a machine room(s), that provides protection from fire 
effects for elevator passengers, people waiting to use elevators, and elevator equip-
ment so that elevators can be used safely for egress. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 243 of 1348 

2.   Means of Egress  

 

2.1.  Intention 

 

 2.1.1.   Means of Egress requirements in this chapter are to accomplish the following. 

 

2.1.1.1.  Provide adequate number of Exits and unobstructed means to access such 
exits, for the occupants of buildings to be able to evacuate to safety during 
fire emergencies. 

 

2.1.1.2.  Protect and improve survivability of occupants not intimate with initial fire 

development. 
 

2.1.1.3.  Provide building features such that safe crowd movement is ensured during 

emergencies. 
 

2.2.  General Requirements  

 

2.2.1.  Two means of egress, as a minimum, shall be pro-
vided in every occupied building or structure, sec-
tion, and area where size, occupancy, and arrange-
ment endanger occupants attempting to use a sin-
gle means of egress that is blocked by fire or 
smoke. 

  
2.2.2.  The two means of egress shall be arranged to mini-

mize the possibility that both might be rendered 
impassable by the same emergency condition. 

Did You Know? 

The origin of ‘NFPA 101, Life 

Safety Code” dates back to 

1912. 

Initially it was to address the 

safety to life of factory work-

ers through guidelines on Exit 

Drills in Factories and 

Schools. 

 
2.2.3. 

In every occupied building or structure, means of 
egress from all parts of the building shall be maintained free and unobstructed. Means 
of egress shall be accessible to the extent necessary to ensure reasonable safety for 
occupants having impaired mobility. 

 
2.2.4.  Every exit shall be clearly visible, or the route to reach every exit shall be conspicuously 

indicated. Each means of egress and its entirety, shall be arranged or marked so that 
the way to a place of safety is indicated in a clear manner. 

 
2.2.5.  The requirements of this chapter are minimum guidelines. It is consultant’s responsi-
bility to refer to the international standards along with UAE Fire and Life Safety Code 
Of Practice, for matters not covered by this code. 

 
2.2.6. 

International codes and standards referred for this chapter are the latest editions of, 
NFPA 101, NFPA 5000, SFPE Handbook, IBC and their referenced standards. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 244 of 1348 

 

2.2.7.  No new construction shall be executed unless the building has been designed and ap-

proved as per Civil Defence requirements. 

 
2.2.8.  No new construction shall be occupied in whole or in part unless the building has been 

designed, approved, inspected and completion certificate is obtained as per Civil De-
fence requirements. 

 
2.2.9.  No modifications, alterations, extensions and change of usage to a building or struc-

ture shall be carried out unless such proposals have been designed, approved, inspect-
ed and completion certificate is obtained as per Civil Defence requirements. 

 
2.2.10.  No under construction buildings or structures shall be occupied in whole or in part un-

less such proposals have been designed, approved, inspected and completion certifi-
cate is obtained as per Civil Defence requirements. 

3.   Components of Means of Egress  

 

3.1.  General 

 

3.1.1.  The provisions of this section express the way of determining the design, construction, 
protection, location and arrangement of exit features to provide safe means of egress 
for occupants from all occupancies hereafter erected, altered or changed in an occu-
pancy.  

3.1.2.  Such means of egress is categorized into distinct following sections. 

 

 
a.   The Exit Access 
b.   The Exit 
c.   The Exit Discharge 

 

3.1.3.  The egress is essentially achieved by combination of the following components of 

means of egress. 

 

a.   Doors 
b.   Stairs 
c.    Corridors 
d.   Passageways 
e.   Horizontal Exits 
f.    Bridges between buildings 
g.   Ramps 
h.   Elevators and Escalators 
i.    Area of Refuge 
j.    Escape Slides and Ladders 

 
3.1.4.  General requirements for any components of Means of Egress shall comply with      

Table 3.1. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 245 of 1348 

 

Table 3.1: General Requirements for Means of Egress 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. HEAD ROOM 

i.  Clear ceiling height of 2285 mm shall be available in means of egress. In not less 
than 50 % of ceiling area, Headroom of 2030 mm, without any obstructions, shall 
be available from finished floor for any means of egress, in any occupancy, includ-
ing industrial equipment access. 

ii.  Head room on stairs shall not be less than 2030 mm, measured vertically above a 

plane, parallel to the most forward projection of the stair tread.  

2. WALKING    

i.  Walking surfaces in the means of egress shall be slip resistant under foreseeable 

SURFACE 

conditions and be securely attached. 

3. CHANGE IN 

LEVEL 

ii.  Walking surfaces shall be nominally level. 
iii. The slope of a walking surface in the direction of travel shall not exceed 1 in 20. 
iv. The slope perpendicular to the direction of travel shall not exceed 1 in 48. 
v.  Horizontal projections such as structural elements, furnishings, , fixtures etc. shall 

not project more than 102 mm over any walking surface between 686 mm to a 
height of 2030 mm from finished floor walking surface. 

i.  Abrupt changes in elevation of walking surfaces shall not exceed 6.3 mm. 
ii.  Changes in elevation above 6.3 mm to 13 mm, shall be beveled with a slope of 1 

in 2. 

iii. Changes in elevation exceeding 13 mm but not in excess of 535 mm shall be con-
sidered a change in level and shall be achieved by either a ramp with maximum 
slope of 1 in 12 or stair with tread depth not less than 330 mm. 

iv. Changes in level in means of egress shall be achieved by an approved means of 

egress where the elevation difference exceeds 535 mm.  

4. GUARDS 

i.  Guards shall be provided at the open sides of means of egress that elevate and 

exceed 760 mm above the floor or the finished ground level below. 

ii.  The height of guards required shall be not less than 1065 mm high, measured 

vertically to the top of the guard from the finished walking surface.  

Figure 3.1.: Head room in means of egress 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 246 of 1348 

3.2.  Doors (Door Assembly) 

 

3.2.1.  Every door and door assembly shall be designed and constructed so that the way of 
egress travel is obvious and direct. Other features such as décor and windows that, 
because of their physical appearance or design or the materials used in their construc-
tion have the potential to be mistaken for doors shall be made inaccessible to the oc-
cupants by barriers or railings. Doors can be of several types. This section covers Stand-
ard doors, Revolving doors, Powered doors, Access controlled doors, Sliding doors and 
Rolling shutters. 

 
3.2.2.  Door assembly shall comply with Table 3.1 and Table 3.2. However, type of Door al-

lowed and modified if provided by individual occupancies as per Section 5., shall over-
ride the requirements of Table 3.2. 

Table 3.2: Doors (Door Assembly) 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  MEASURING 

CLEAR 

WIDTH OF 

DOOR 

i.  The measurement shall be taken at the narrowest point in the door opening. 
ii.  The measurement shall be taken between the face of the door leaf fully open 

(For existing door assemblies) or open 90 degrees (For new swinging door assem-
blies) and the stop of the frame. 

iii. Projections of not more than 100 mm into the door opening width on the hinge 
side shall not be considered reductions in clear width, provided that such projec-
tions are for purposes of accommodating panic hardware or fire exit hardware 
and are located not less than 865 mm, and not more than 1220 mm, above the 
floor. 

iv. Projections exceeding 2030 mm above the floor shall not be considered reduc-

tions in clear width. 

Figure 3.2.: Measuring Door Assembly width 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 247 of 1348 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

Table 3.2: Doors (Door Assembly) 

1.  MEASURING 

v.  For measurement of Egress capacity width, Projections of not more than 90 mm 

CLEAR 

WIDTH OF 

DOOR 

on each side of door opening width shall not be considered reductions in clear 
width, provided that such projections are located not more than 965 mm above 
the floor. 

2.  MINIMUM 

i.  Minimum Door width shall not be less than 915 mm or as per egress capacity 

DOOR 

WIDTH 

3.  FLOOR LEVEL 

AT THE 

DOOR 

width requirements, whichever is higher. 

ii.  Where a pair of door leaves is provided, one door leaf shall provide not less than 

810 mm clear width opening. 

iii. Bathroom doors serving a room not exceeding 6.5 m2 and not required to be ac-
cessible to persons with severe mobility impairments shall be not less than 710 
mm in door leaf width. 

iv. Minimum door width of a balcony, not used for an assembly usage, shall not be 

less than 810 mm. 

v.  Minimum Door widths as required by individual occupancies shall override the 

requirements of Table 3.2. 

vi. Minimum door width of an exit stair having a width equal to or more than 1420 

mm, shall be not less than two thirds of the required width of stairway. 

i.  The elevation of the floor surfaces on both sides of a door opening shall not vary 
by more than 13 mm. and it shall be maintained so for not less than width of wid-
est door leaf. 

ii.  Thresholds at door openings shall not exceed 13 mm in height. 
iii. Where doors serve spaces that are not normally occupied, the floor level shall be 

permitted to be lower than that of the door opening but shall be not more than 
205 mm lower. 

4.  DIRECTION 

i.  Door leaves required to be of the side-hinged or pivoted-swinging type shall swing 

OF THE 

DOOR LEAF 

SWING 

in the direction of egress travel where serving a room or area with an occupant 
load of 50 or more, or serving horizontal exit, or serving high hazard content room 
or serving an exit enclosure. 

ii.  Doors serving Residential Units shall not be required to swing in the direction of 

egress.  

iii. Any door assembly in a means of egress shall be of the side-hinged or pivoted-

swinging type, and shall be installed to be capable of swinging from any position 
to the full required width unless otherwise specified in other sections of this code. 

 

 

Figure 3.3.: Measuring Door Assembly for Egress Capacity  

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 248 of 1348 

 

Table 3.2: Doors (Door Assembly) 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

5.  FORCE TO 

i.  The door assembly shall be readily operable from the egress side without special 

OPEN 

knowledge or effort. 

ii.  The forces required to fully open any door leaf manually in a means of egress shall 
not exceed                                                                                                                                
67 N (15 lbf) to release the latch,                                                                                               
133 N (30 lbf) to set any door leaf in motion,                                                                   
67 N (15 lbf) to open any door leaf to the minimum required width. 

6.  DOOR LEAF 

ENCROACH-

MENT 

i.  During its swing, any door leaf in a means of egress shall leave unobstructed, not 
less than one-half of the required width of an aisle, a corridor, a passageway, or a 
landing. 

ii.  Any door, which needs to be held open, when fully open, in a means of egress shall 
not project more than 180 mm into the required width of an aisle, a corridor, a pas-
sageway, or a landing, unless the door leaf is equipped with an approved self-
closing device and is not required to swing in the direction of egress travel. 

iii. All hardware for door release shall have maximum projection or obstruction as per 

Table 3.2.1.iii and v. 

7.  LOCKS AND 

i.  Locking type Door leaves shall be arranged to be opened readily from the egress 

LATCHES 

side whenever the building is occupied. 

ii.  Locks, if provided, shall not require a tool or special knowledge or effort for opera-

tion from the egress side. And a key is immediately available to any occupant inside 
the building when it is locked. 

iii.  Stair enclosure door if allows access to roof, shall allow re-entry from the roof. 
iv.  Door latch releasing mechanism shall be located not less than 865 mm from fin-

ished floor and not more than 1220 mm from finished floor. 

8.  ACCESS     

i.  A sensor shall be provided on the egress side, arranged to unlock the door in the 

CONTROL 

direction of egress upon detection of an approaching occupant. 

ii.  Door locks shall be arranged to unlock in the direction of egress from a manual re-

lease device. Such manual release device, shall be obvious without special 
knowledge and capable of being operated with one hand in the direction of egress. 

iii. When operated, the manual release device shall result in direct interruption of 

power to the lock —independent of the locking system electronics — and the lock 
shall remain unlocked for not less than 30 seconds.  

iv. Loss of power to the listed releasing hardware automatically unlocks the door as-

sembly in the direction of egress. See Section 7 for Materials. 

v.  An automatic release that is actuated with the initiation of the building fire alarm 

system shall be provided to unlock doors serving means of egress. 

vi. Every electrically operated door assembly in a stair enclosure serving more than 
four stories, shall be provided with manual means to unlock such stair enclosure 
door assemblies to allow re-entry. 

vii.Access control mechanism shall unlock doors automatically when there is sprinkler 

activation, fire protective signaling system. 

viii.A mechanical push button shall be provided next to the access controlled door with 

clear signage, which when manually operated shall unlock door within 15 seconds. 
The manual release device shall be readily accessible and clearly identified by a sign 
that reads as follows: PUSH TO EXIT.  

ix. Fire Alarm system’s manual call points activation shall not unlock the access con-

trolled doors. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 249 of 1348 

 

Table 3.2: Doors (Door Assembly) 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

9.  DELAYED 

i.  Delayed Egress locking Systems shall be allowed only in fully sprinklered low and 

EGRESS    

LOCKING    

SYSTEMS 

10.  ELEVATOR 

LOBBY 

DOOR 

LOCKS 

ordinary hazard category buildings. 

ii.  Such door locks shall unlock in the direction of egress upon actuation of auto-

matic sprinkler system OR 1 heat detector OR 2 smoke detectors. 

iii. Loss of power to the listed releasing hardware automatically unlocks the door 

assembly in the direction of egress. See Section 7 for Materials. 

iv. Where swiping cards and finger prints are required to open doors, a mechanical 
release device shall be provided at the door with clear signage, which when man-
ually operated with a force of not more than 67 N, shall unlock door within 15 
seconds. The initiation of the release process shall activate an audible signal in 
the vicinity of the door opening.  

i.  Elevator Lobby exit doors shall be permitted to be electrically locked provided 
they are approved and listed (See Section 7 for materials), the building is fully 
sprinklered, lobby is provided with automatic fire detection and alarm system, a 
two-way communication system is provided between elevator lobby and central 
control room which is constantly staffed. 

ii.  Loss of power, activation of sprinkler system, activation of water flow switch, acti-
vation of building fire alarm system shall unlock electrically locked elevator lobby 
doors. 

iii. Access controlled door locks as per Table 3.2.8. and Delayed Egress locks as per 

Table 3.2.9. shall not be allowed for elevator lobby door locks. 

11. HOISTWAY 

ENCLOSURE 

i.  Doors, other than hoistway doors and the elevator car door, shall be prohibited 
at the point of access to an elevator car unless such doors are readily openable 
from the car side without a key, tool, special knowledge or effort. 

12.  PANIC    

i.  Only approved and listed fire exit hardware shall be used on fire protection-rated 

HARDWARE 

AND FIRE 

EXIT          

door assemblies. See Section 7 for Materials. 

ii.  It shall consist of a cross bar or a push pad, the actuating portion of which ex-

tends across not less than one-half of the width of the door leaf. 

iii. It shall be located not less than 865 mm from finished floor and not more than 

HARDWARE 

1220 mm from finished floor. 

iv. Doors provided with Panic or fire exit hardware, shall not be provided with any 

other locks. 

 

Figure 3.4.: Panic Hardware height from the finished floor  

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 250 of 1348 

Table 3.2: Doors (Door Assembly) 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

13.  SELF       

i.  Self closing doors shall remain closed unless actuated by fire detection and alarm 

CLOSING 

DOORS 

system or sprinkler activation of the building or opened manually.  

ii.  Self closing doors shall be able to open manually without any special tools and 

knowledge. 

14.  REVOLVING 

DOORS 

iii. Self closing doors, held open by hold-open mechanism, shall become automati-

cally self closing upon release of hold-open devices, loss of power and when man-
ually operated. 

i.  Each revolving door assembly shall have a conforming side-hinged swinging door 
assembly in the same wall as the revolving door within 3050 mm of the revolving 
door, unless it is serving street floor elevator lobby and no stairway or other 
means of egress from within that building is not discharging from such revolving 
door. 

ii.  Revolving door assemblies shall not be used within 3050 mm of the foot or the 

top of stairs or escalators. 

iii. Revolving door wings shall be capable of being collapsed into a book-fold posi-
tion, creating an egress width of 915 mm, when applied a force not exceeding 
130 lbf (580 N) to the wings within 75 mm of outer edge. 

iv. Each revolving door, when considered as a component of means of egress, shall 

not be credited for more than 50 % of required egress capacity and not more 
than 50 person capacity. 

v.  Revolving door maximum speeds shall be as per Table 3.3. 

Table 3.3: Revolving Door Maximum Speed 

INSIDE    
DIAMETER 

POWER DRIVEN 
SPEED              
CONTROL (RPM) 

MANUAL SPEED              
CONTROL (RPM) 

1. 1980 mm 

2. 2135 mm 

11 

10 

3. 2285 mm 

4. 2440 mm 

5. 2590 mm 

6. 2745 mm 

7. 2895 mm 

8. 3050 mm 

9 

9 

8 

8 

7 

7 

12 

11 

11 

10 

9 

9 

8 

8 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 251 of 1348 

 

 

Table 3.2: Doors (Door Assembly) 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

15. TURNSTILES 

i.  Turnstiles and Similar Devices that restrict people travel and are used to col-

AND  SIMILAR 

CONTROLLED 

PASSAGE 

MECHANISM. 

lect fares or control entry into and from a building shall not be part of any 
means of egress. 

ii.  Turnstiles having a clear width of 420 mm that turn freely in the direction of 

egress travel shall be permitted, provided a side-hinged swinging door as-
sembly is available within 3050 mm of the Turnstile. 

iii. Turnstiles shall freewheel in the egress direction when primary power is lost 

or upon manual release by an employee assigned in the area.  

iv. Security access Turnstiles having maximum height of 990 mm and mini-

mum clear width of 560 mm shall be allowed as part of means of 
egress, provided it is located in fully sprinklered area and given egress 
capacity of not more than 50 persons. 

v.  Any security physical barrier that automatically retract or swing to an 

unobstructed open position upon loss of power OR readily available 
manual release mechanism OR upon actuation from sprinkler activa-
tion OR upon actuation from fire protective signal shall be considered 
as component of means of egress. 

16.  DOOR IN     

i.  The entry and exit from folded partitioned space shall not be used by more 

FOLDING         

PARTITIONS 

than 20 persons unless such arrangements are accompanied by swinging exit 
doors. 

ii.  The partitions shall be arranged so that they do not extend across any aisle or 

corridor used as an exit access to the required exits from the space.  

iii. Partitions shall confirm to interior finish requirements of Chapter 1, 

section 7. 

iv. Partition shall have a simple method of release, and are capable of be-
ing opened quickly and easily by experienced persons in case of emer-
gency.  

TURNSTILE FOR ILLUSTRATION 

SECURITY TURNSTILE FOR ILLUSTRATION 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 252 of 1348 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

Table 3.2: Doors (Door Assembly) 

i.  Horizontal Sliding Doors shall be considered part of means of egress provided the 
door leaf is operable from either side without special knowledge or effort and car-
ries signage on it indicating that it is sliding door. 

ii.  The force required to operate the door leaf in the direction of travel is not more 
than 133 N (30 lbf) to set the leaf in motion and is not more than 67 N (15 lbf ) to 
close the leaf or open it to the minimum required width. 

iii. Where fire ratings are required, sliding doors shall be tested and approved as per 

Section 7. 

iv. Where door leaves are operated by power upon the approach of a person or are 
provided with power-assisted manual operation, the design shall be such that, in 
the event of power failure, the leaves open manually to allow egress travel or 
close when necessary to safeguard the means of egress. 

v.  The feature for manual operation must work at all times, even when other fea-

tures of the door assembly’s mechanism such as the treadle, electric eye or sliding 
rail, have failed. 

vi. The door assembly shall be designed and installed so that, when a force is applied 

to the door leaf on the side from which egress is made, it shall be capable of 
swinging from any position to provide full use of the required width of the open-
ing in which it is installed. 

vii. A readily visible, durable sign in letters not less than 25 mm high on a contrasting 
background that reads as follows shall be located on the egress side of each door 
opening, “IN EMERGENCY, PUSH TO OPEN”. 

viii.Sliding, power-operated door assemblies in an exit access serving an occupant 

load of fewer than 50 that manually open in the direction of door leaf travel, with 
door opening force not exceeding 133 N, shall not be required to have the swing-
out feature. The required sign shall be in letters not less than 25 mm high on a 
contrasting background and shall read as, “IN EMERGENCY, SLIDE TO OPEN” 

17. HORIZONTAL   

SLIDING 

DOORS AND 

POWER-

OPERATED 

SLIDING 

DOORS 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 253 of 1348 

 

Table 3.2: Doors (Door Assembly) 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

18.  FIRE               

RESISTANCE 

RATING OF 

DOORS 

i.  Fire resistance rating of Doors, which open into exit corridors, exit access corri-
dors and into exit stairs shall comply with Table 3.3.a. and Table 3.3.b. unless 
specified in individual occupancies as per Section 5. 

ii.  Door fire rating is not required where located in non-fire rated walls. 

Table 3.3.a.: Fire Resistance Rating of Doors 

DOOR FIRE  
RATING 

SMOKE 
PROOF 

SELF 
CLOSING 

LATCHES 
AND LOCKS 

90 Minutes 

90 Minutes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Self Closing 

Latches Only 

Self Closing 

Latches Only 

Self Closing 

Latches Only 

DOOR LOCATION 

1. Exit Stair 

2. Exit Passageway 

3. Exit Corridor of 1 hour fire rating 

60 Minutes 

4. Exit Corridor of no fire rating 

None 

Not required  Not required  Latches Only 

5. Service corridor of 1 hour fire rating 

60 Minutes 

Not required  Self Closing 

Table 3.2. 

7. Service corridor of no fire rating 

None 

8. Elevator Lobby 

9. Garbage room 

60 Minutes 

60 Minutes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Not required  Table 3.2. 

Self Closing 

Table 3.2.10. 

Self Closing 

Latches Only 

Table 3.3.b.: Fire Resistance Rating of Unit Doors 

MAIN DOORS OF UNITS IN          
ENCLOSED EXIT CORRIDOR 

DOOR FIRE  
RATING 

SMOKE 
PROOF 

SELF 
CLOSING 

LATCHES 
AND LOCKS 

1. Apartment unit main door 

60 Minutes 

Not required  Not required  Table 3.2.7. 

2. Residential unit main door 

60 Minutes 

Not required  Not required  Table 3.2.7. 

3. Labor accommodation unit 

60 Minutes 

Not required  Not required  Table 3.2.7. 

door 

4. Staff accommodation unit door  60 Minutes 

Not required  Not required  Table 3.2.7. 

5. Hotel unit main door 

60 Minutes 

Not required  Yes 

Table 3.2.7. 

6. Office unit main door 

-None if  sprinklered 
-60 Minutes,  if not             
sprinklered 

Not required  Yes 

Table 3.2. 

7. Kitchen door in residential/

None 

Not required  Not required  Table 3.2.7. 

Apartment 

8. Unit doors in open external cor-

None 

Not required  Not required  Table 3.2.7. 

ridor 

9. Education class room doors 

 

-None if  sprinklered 
-60 Minutes,  if not             
sprinklered 

Not required  Yes 

Table 3.2. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 254 of 1348 

3.3.  Stair 

 

3.3.1.  Stairs can be used as a component in the means of egress, whether interior or exterior 

to a building, serve multiple functions, allowing normal occupant movement among 
floors of building, providing egress during emergencies and fires and facilitating rescue 
and fire control operations by Fire fighters. 

 
3.3.1.  Exit Stair is that part of the means of egress which is separated from all other spaces of 

a building by a fixed and permanent non combustible construction as required by 
Chapter 1, providing a protected way of travel to the Exit Discharge.  

 
3.3.2.  Stair shall comply with Table 3.1 and Table 3.5. However, type of Stair allowed and 

modifications, if provided by individual occupancies as per Section 5, shall override the 
requirements of Table 3.4. 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

Table 3.4: Stair 

1.  STAIR WIDTH  

i.  The minimum required width of an exit stair serving up to 2000 persons shall 

not be less than 1200 mm and shall satisfy the egress capacity. 

ii.  The minimum required width of an exit stair serving more than 2000 persons 

shall not be less than 1420 mm and shall satisfy the egress capacity. 

iii. Stair width shall not decrease in width along the direction of egress travel. 
iv. The required width of a stair shall be measured from wall to the clear availa-
ble width of the step. (See Figure 3.6.a.). The maximum projections of hand-
rails allowed in this required width is 100 mm on each side, at a height of 865 
mm—965 mm. 

i.  Maximum height of riser shall not exceed 180 mm. 
ii.  Minimum height of riser shall not be less than 100 mm. 
iii. Riser heights shall be uniform throughout each stair flight between landings. 
iv. Where riser heights are adjusted to comply with acceptable stair treads, 

flights and arrangements in accordance with Figure 3.13.a., the maximum 
difference of dimension allowed in a flight is 10 mm. 

2.  STAIR RISER 

HEIGHT  

3.  STAIR TREAD 

DEPTH  

i.  Minimum stair tread depth shall not be less than 280 mm. 
ii.  The tread slope shall not exceed 21 mm/meter (slope of 1 in 48) 
iii. Tread depth shall be uniform throughout the stair. The maximum difference 

of dimension allowed in a flight is 10 mm. 

4.  MINIMUM     
HEADROOM  

i.  Head room on stairs shall not be less than 2030 mm, measured vertically 
above a plane, parallel to the most forward projection of the stair tread.  

5.  LANDINGS  

i.  Maximum height between landings shall not be more than 3660 mm. 
ii.  Every stair shall have landing at the door opening and landing width shall not 

be less than the required stair width. 

iii. Maximum landing area a stair door can encroach in its swing is one half of the 

required landing width. 

iv. Landing width shall not decrease in width along the direction of egress travel. 

Landing width shall not be required to exceed 1220 mm in the direction of 
travel, provided that the stair has a straight run.  

v.  The landing slope shall not exceed 21 mm/meter (slope of 1 in 48). 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 255 of 1348 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

Table 3.4: Stair 

6.  SURFACES  

i.  Stair treads and landings shall be free of projections or lips that could trip stair 

users. 

ii.  Stair treads and landings within the same stairway shall have consistent sur-

face traction. 

 

Figure 3.5.: Stair Specifications 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 256 of 1348 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

Table 3.4: Stair 

6.  SURFACES  

i.  Stair treads and landings shall be free of projections or lips that could trip stair 

users. 

ii.  Stair treads and landings within the same stairway shall have consistent sur-

face traction. 

 

Figure 3.6.a.: Handrail projection, Stair Width Measurements 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 257 of 1348 

 

 

Figure 3.6.b.: Stair Risers, Stair Width, Door opening and Landing Measurements 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 258 of 1348 

 

Table 3.4: Stair 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

7.  STAIR               
SEPARATION 
FROM REST OF 
THE BUILDING 
AREAS  

i.  Every stair serving as an exit in Low depth and Low rise buildings (having 

height up to 15 m), shall be separated from rest of the building areas by a con-
struction of at least block-work and ensure 2 hour fire resistance rating. 

ii.  Every stair serving as an exit in High depth, Mid rise, (having height more than 
15 m), High rise buildings  and superhighrise buildings shall be separated from 
rest of the building areas by a construction of RCC (Reinforced Concrete) and 
ensure 2 hour fire resistance rating. 

iii. Separation shall extend vertically from the lowest level of the stair to a point  

3 m above the top most landing of the stairs or to the roofline. 

iv. Elevators shall not be in a common shaft enclosure with stairway. 

8.  PENETRATIONS  

i.  Space within the stair shall not be used for any other purpose than occupant 

INTO STAIR 

SPACE 

9.  ILLUMINATION 

FOR STAIR 

10.  HANDRAILS 

 

exit and evacuation. 

ii.  Space under the stair shall not be used for any other purpose unless such 

space is fully isolated from the stair with 2 hour fire resistance construction 
and entry/exit for such spaces shall not be through the stair enclosure envel-
oping that space. 

iii. Only penetrations allowed into Stair enclosure are Fire Hose and Sprinkler 

Piping, Fire protection piping valves, electrical conduits serving stair enclosure 
and fire detection and alarm system wiring enclosed in metal conduits. 

iv. Fire Hose Reel and Landing valve cabinets shall not be located in the stair en-

closure. 

v.  Pressurization ducting, AC units, Fan coil units, Ventilation ducts, water piping, 
heater piping, drainage piping etc., shall not be located in the stair enclosure. 

i.  Exit stair shall be illuminated at all times that the building is occupied. Lighting 
control devices that turn lighting on and off based on occupant movement or 
presence shall be permitted. 

ii.  Lighting control devices that dim the lighting levels within the exit enclosure 
shall not be installed unless they provide a minimum of 1 ft-candle (10.8 lux) 
of illumination within the exit enclosure measured at the walking surface. 

iii. Where stair is provided with Photoluminescent strips or marking, the lighting 

used to charge such Photoluminescent materials shall not be controlled by 
motion sensors. 

iv. Where stair is provided with window for illumination, such window pane shall 

be fixed, 2 hour fire resistance rated and non-operable. 

i.  Stairs shall have handrails on both sides. 
ii.  Handrails on stairs shall be not less than 865 mm and not more than 965 mm, 
above the surface of the tread, measured vertically to the top of the rail from 
the leading edge of the tread. 

iii. The height of required handrails that form part of a guard shall be permitted 
to exceed 965 mm, but shall not exceed 1065 mm, measured vertically to the 
top of the rail from the leading edge of the tread. 

iv. Handrails shall be installed to provide a clearance of not less than 57 mm be-

tween the handrail and the wall to which it is fastened. 

v.  Handrails shall be available within 760 mm of all portions of the required 

egress width. 

vi. Where intermediate handrails are provided because of the stair width exceed-

ing 1750 mm, the minimum clear width between such handrails shall be 510 
mm. along the natural path of travel. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 259 of 1348 

 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

Table 3.4: Stair 

10.  HANDRAILS 

vii.  Handrails shall continue for the full length of each flight of stair. 
viii. Inside handrails shall be continuous, graspable between flights at landings. 
ix.   Inside handrails shall be continuous between flights at landings. 
x.  Handrails shall have circular cross section with an outside diameter of not 

less than 32 mm and not more than 51 mm. 

xi.   Handrail shape that is other than circular shall be with a perimeter dimension 

of not less than 100 mm, but not more than 160 mm, and with the largest 
cross-sectional dimension not more than 57 mm, provided that graspable 
edges are rounded so as to provide a radius of not less than 3.2 mm. 

xii.  Handrail brackets shall not project horizontally beyond the sides of the hand-

rail within 38 mm of the bottom of the handrail and provided that, for each 
additional 13 mm of handrail perimeter dimension greater than 100 mm, the 
vertical clearance dimension of 38 mm is reduced by 3.2 mm. 

xiii. Handrail brackets shall have edges with radius not less than 0.25 mm. 

SOME HANDRAIL SHAPES FOR ILLUSTRATION (See Table 3.4.10.x.) 

Figure 3.7.: Handrail Specifications 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 260 of 1348 

 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

Table 3.4: Stair 

11.  GUARDS  

i.  Guards shall be provided for every elevated means of egress, open landing for 

stairs where elevated surface is more than 760 mm from finished ground lev-
el. 

ii.  Such guards shall not encroach the required clear width of the stair. 
iii. The height of guards shall be measured vertically to the top of the guard from 

the surface adjacent thereto. 

iv. Guards shall be not less than 1200 mm high. In case of stair or ramp handrails 

that form part of a guard, the height of the guard can be reduced to 1065 
mm.  

v.  Open guards, other than approved existing open guards, shall have intermedi-

ate rails or an ornamental pattern up to a height of 865 mm, such that a 
sphere 150 mm in diameter is not able to pass through any opening. 

vi. The triangular openings formed by the riser, tread, and bottom element of a 

guardrail at the open side of a stair shall be of such size that a sphere 150 mm 
in diameter is not able to pass through the triangular opening. 

vii.See Chapter 1, Section 2.17. for balcony railings, balustrades and fencing. 

 

Figure 3.8.: Guard Specifications 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 261 of 1348 

Table 3.4: Stair 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

12.  STAIR AND 

i.  Every building shall be provided with a signage, indicating the floor level, wing 

FLOOR        

SIGNAGE 

of the building if any, and direction of egress. 

ii.  Signage shall be in English and Arabic. 
iii. Signage shall be provided inside the stair enclosure at floor landings (Not mid 

landings), clearly visible for stair users and shall be located a minimum of 1220 
mm above the floor landing, and the top of the signage shall be located a 
maximum of 2135 mm above the floor landing. 

iv. Lettering shall be a minimum of 25 mm high. 
v.  Signage shall not be provided on the door leaf. 

13.  TREAD          

i.  Where contrasting marking is applied to stairs, such marking shall comply with 

MARKING 

the following: 
a.  Exit stair treads shall incorporate a marking strip that is applied as a paint/

coating or be a material that is integral with the nosing of each step.  

b.  Surface-applied marking strips using adhesive-backed tapes shall not be 

used. 

c.  The marking strip shall be installed along the horizontal leading edge of 

the step and shall extend the full width of the step. 

d.  The marking strip shall have a minimum horizontal width of 25 mm and a 

maximum width of 51 mm. 

e.  The marking strip shall be not more than 13 mm from the leading edge of 
each step and shall not overlap the leading edge of the step by more than 
13 mm down the vertical face of the step.  

 

Figure 3.9.: Stair Signage 

Points to Ponder 

 
FLOOR THE 13th ! 
 
Many of the building owners do not want to name 13th floor in their building. Many of the buy-
ers do not buy units on 13th floor. Floor signage after 12th floor is labeled as 14th floor.  
 
Civil Defence strongly object to this practice and recommends naming all floors appropriately in 
sequence, not to hamper rescue and fire fighting operations. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 262 of 1348 

Table 3.4: Stair 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

14.  OUTSIDE STAIR 

i.  An open outside Exit stair shall not be allowed to be provided in any building 

at more than 15 m from finished ground level. 

ii.  Outside stairs more than 11 m above the finished ground level, shall be pro-

vided with an opaque visual obstruction not less than 1220 mm in height. 
iii.  Outside stairs shall be separated from the interior of the building by con-

struction with the 2 hour fire resistance rating with fixed or self-closing open-
ing protectives. Figure 3.11. 

iv.  Such separation shall extend vertically from the finished ground level to a 

point 3 m above the topmost landing of the stairs or to the roofline, whichev-
er is lower. And horizontally separation shall extend for not less than 3 m. 
See Figure 3.11. 

v.  Roof shall extend horizontally to each side of the stair for not less than the 

stair width. 

vi.  Outside stairs, other than existing outside stairs, shall be not less than 50 

percent open on one side 

vii.  Outside stairs and landings shall be designed to minimize water accumulation 

on their surfaces. 

viii. Outside stairs serving an exterior exit access balcony that has two remote 
outside stairways or ramps shall be permitted to be unprotected.                
See Figure 3.10. 

ix.  Outside stairs serving not in excess of two adjacent stories, including the sto-

rey of exit discharge, shall be permitted to be unprotected where there is a 
remotely located second exit. See Note in Figure 3.10. 

 

 

Figure 3.10.: Outside stair with exterior exit access balcony 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 263 of 1348 

 

 

Figure 3.11.a.: Outside stair with exterior wall flushed with building wall 

Figure 3.11.b.: Outside stair with exterior wall protruding outside the building 

Figure 3.11.c.: Outside stair with exposed to adjacent building wall 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 264 of 1348 

 

Table 3.4: Stair 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

14.  OUTSIDE STAIR  x.  All openings below an outside stair shall be protected with an assembly hav-

ing not less than a 45 minutes fire protection rating. 

xi.   Openings to the side of an outside stair within 3m should have a fire protec-

tion rating of 30 minutes.  

xii.  Outside stairs shall be arranged to avoid any impediments to the use of the 
stairs by persons having a fear of high places. Outside stairs more than three 
stories in height or 11 m in height, shall be provided with an opaque visual 
obstruction not less than 1220 mm in height. 

Figure 3.11.d.: Opening protection around Outside stair  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 265 of 1348 

 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

Table 3.4: Stair 

15.   SCISSOR OR      

INTERLOCKED 

STAIR 

Interlocking or scissor stairs shall be considered as a single exit.  

i. 
ii.  Scissor Stairs shall be enclosed by a 2 hour fire resistance rated con-
struction, with block wall for non high rise buildings and with RCC in 
Highrise buildings.  

iii.  Both sections of a Scissor Stairs are not required to be fire separated 

from each other as the scissor stair is considered as a single exit. 

iv.  Penetrations or communicating openings are allowed between two 

sections of Scissor Stairs. 

v.  Doors shall be 90 minutes fire protection rated in Scissor Stairs. 
 

PLAN 

SECTION 

Figure 3.12.: Scissor or Interlocked Stair  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 266 of 1348 

 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

Table 3.4: Stair 

16.  SPIRAL 

STAIR 

17.  WINDERS 

18.  CURVED 

STAIRS 

i.  Spiral Stairs are not allowed in means of egress except for the following.                 
a. In Industrial occupancy to access equipment, mezzanine where equipment ac-
cess is required, Control room to access equipment and process line floor.                              
b. In Storage occupancy to access mezzanine which is only for storage and not 
office space.                                                                                                                            
c. In Retail areas to access mezzanines where goods are stored.                                 
d. Private and Commercial Villa 

ii.  The clear width of the stairs shall be not less than 660 mm. 
iii.  The height of risers shall not exceed 240 mm. 
iv.  The headroom shall be not less than 1980 mm. 
v.  Treads shall have a depth not less than 190 mm at a point 305 mm from the nar-

rower edge. 

vi.  All treads shall be identical. 
vii. Handrails shall be provided as per Table 3.4.10. 
viii. The turn of the stairway shall be such that the outer handrail is at the right side of 

descending users. 

i.  Winders are not allowed in Means of egress except for the following.                       

a. In Industrial occupancy to access equipment, mezzanine where equipment ac-
cess is required, Control room to access equipment and process line  floor.                              
b. In Storage occupancy to access mezzanine which is only for storage and not 
office space.                                                                                                                             
c. In Retail areas to access mezzanines where goods are stored.                                 
d. Private and Commercial Villa. 

ii.  Winders can be used in open stairs which are not exit stairs. 
iii.  Winders shall have tread depth of not less than 150 mm and tread depth of not 

less than 280 mm, at a point 305 mm from narrowest edge. 

i.  Curved Stairs are not allowed in Means of egress except for the following.              
a. In Industrial occupancy to access equipment, mezzanine where equipment ac-
cess is required, Control room to access equipment and process line  floor.                              
b. In Storage occupancy to access mezzanine which is only for storage and not 
office space.                                                                                                                            
c. In Retail areas to access mezzanines where goods are stored.                                 
d. Private and Commercial Villa 

ii.  Curved Stairs can be used as open stairs which are not exit stairs. 
iii.  Curved Stairs shall have tread depth of not less than 255 mm at a point 305 mm 

from narrowest edge. 

CURVED STAIR 

WINDERS 

SPIRAL STAIR 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 267 of 1348 

 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

Table 3.4: Stair 

19. EQUIPMENT     

i. 

ACCESS 

Industrial Equipment Access shall comply to the following.                                
a. Minimum Horizontal dimension of walkway, landing or platform shall be 
560 mm.                                                                                                                        
b. Minimum stair or ramp width shall be 560 mm.                                                       
c. Minimum tread width shall be 560 mm.                                                                 
d. Minimum tread depth shall be 255 mm.                                                                            
e. Maximum riser height shall be 230 mm                                                                           
f. Maximum height between landings shall be 3660 mm.                                    
g. Minimum head room shall be 2030 mm.                                                            
h. Minimum width of door opening shall be 560 mm.                                                        
i. Railings height shall be 865 mm to 965 mm and shall be permitted to ter-
minate directly above top and bottom risers. 

20.   STAIR TREAD, 

i.  Exit stair designs is preferred to be as per Figure 3.13.a.                                                        

FLIGHTS AND     
ARRANGEMENT 

(Refer to Figure 3.13.a.)                                                                                                                            
a. Regular flights and consistent dimensions of steps is acceptable .                                                                                 
b. Consistent flights and consistent dimensions on all sides are acceptable.                                               
c. Consistent flights and consistent dimensions of steps are acceptable                                          
d. Direct exit at discharge level from under the stair flight.                                 
e. Two doors on opposite sides are acceptable if each door swing does not 
obstruct more than half of the required landing width.                                                            
f. RCC Stairs with separate core but common RCC divider is acceptable only 
in lowrise and midrise buildings provided whole stair complies with building 
construction type and separation distance.                                                                  
g. Straight run stairs are acceptable, provided maximum height between 
landings is 3660 mm.                                                                                                 
h. RCC Stairs with separate core but common RCC divider is acceptable only 
in lowrise and midrise buildings provided whole stair complies with building 
construction type and separation distance between exits.                                                                                                          
i. Consistent flights with consistent dimensions of steps on opposite sides 
are acceptable.                                                                                                                         
j. RCC Stairs with separate core but common RCC divider is acceptable only 
in lowrise and midrise buildings provided whole stair complies with building 
construction type and separation distance between exits.                                                      

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 268 of 1348 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

Table 3.4: Stair 

20.   STAIR TREAD, 

ii.   Exit stair designs shown in Figure 3.13.b. are not acceptable.                             

FLIGHTS AND     
ARRANGEMENT 

(Refer to Figure 3.13.b.)                                                                                                                
a. Winders are not acceptable.                                                                                  
b. Less than 3 steps at intermediate landings are not acceptable.                                  
c. Step riser height dimensions exceeding maximum variation of 10 mm with-
in flight is not acceptable.                                                                                                                      
d. Winders are not acceptable.                                                                                           
e. Door in the middle of landing obstructing more than half of required land-
ing width is not acceptable.                                                                                          
f. Step riser height dimensions exceeding maximum variation of 10 mm with-
in flight is not acceptable.                                                                                                    
g. Stair doors next to each other is not acceptable.                                                        
h. Stair doors opening into each other and obstructing more than half of the 
required landing width is not acceptable.                                                                                                                                      
i. Stair doors next to each other is not acceptable                                                          
j. Step riser height dimensions exceeding maximum variation of 10 mm with-
in flight are not acceptable                                                                                                         
k. Stair doors next to each other is not acceptable                                                         
l. Less than 3 steps not recommended but acceptable only from basement to 
ground floor or roof access from a floor below.                                     

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 269 of 1348 

 

 

a 

b 

c 

d 

e 

f 

g 

h 

j 

i 

Figure 3.13.a.: Preferred Stair treads, flights and arrangements 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 270 of 1348 

a 

i 

 

 

b 

c 

d 

e 

f 

g 

h 

j 

k 

l 

Figure 3.13.b.: Not acceptable Stair treads, flights and arrangements 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 271 of 1348 

3.4.  Horizontal Exit 

 

3.4.1.  Horizontal exits shall be permitted to be substituted for other exits where the total 

egress capacity and the total number of the other non-horizontal exits leading outside 
the building is not less than half (50%) that required for the entire area of the building 
or connected buildings, unless otherwise permitted by Health care and detention occu-
pancies. 

 
3.4.2.  Horizontal Exit shall comply with Table 3.1 and Table 3.6. However, allowance of hori-

zontal exits and modifications if provided by individual occupancies sections, shall 
override the requirements of  Table 3.6. 

Table 3.6: Horizontal Exits 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  COMPARTMENTS   i.  Every Fire compartment considered as horizontal exit shall also have at least 
one or 50% of the required number of exits with required exit capacity that is 
not a horizontal exit. 

2.  FIRE RATING  

ii.  Any fire compartment not having an exit leading directly to outside shall be 
considered as part of an adjoining fire compartment with an exit leading to 
the outside.  

i.  Fire barriers separating areas or buildings, forming horizontal exits shall have 
minimum of 2 hour fire resistance rating, continuous from ceiling to finished 
floor level of the areas it is separating. 

ii.  The floors on which the horizontal exit fire barrier is omitted, shall be separat-

ed from the floor having horizontal exit by at least 2 hour fire resistance 
rating. 

iii. Vertical openings between the storey with horizontal exits and the open fire 
area storey shall be enclosed with 2 hour fire resistance rated construction. 
iv.  Where fire barriers serving horizontal exits terminate at outside walls, and 

the outside walls are at an angle of less than 180 degrees for a distance of 3 
m on each side of the horizontal exit,                                                                                      
a. Such outside walls shall be 1 hour fire resistance rated with 45 minutes rat-
ed openings protectives, for a distance of 3 m on each side of the horizontal 
exits.                                                                                                                                         
b. Or one of the outside walls shall have a 2-hour fire resistance rating with 
opening protectives having a minimum 90 minutes fire protection rating, for a 
distance of 3 m from intersection with the horizontal exit. 

3.  EXIT TO  OUTSIDE   i.  Every horizontal exit shall be arranged such that there are continuously avail-
able paths of travel leading from each side of the horizontal exit to stairway 
or corridor or smoke proof enclosure or ramp, leading to outside the building.  

4.  LOCKS  

i.  Wherever either side of a horizontal exit is occupied the doors used in the 

horizontal exit shall be unlocked from the egress side. 

5.  FLOOR AREA  

i.  The floor area on either side of a horizontal exit shall be sufficient to hold the 

occupants of both floor areas and shall provide at least 0.28 m2 clear floor 
area per person.  

6.  PENETRATIONS 

i.  Ducts penetrating fire barrier with horizontal exit shall have listed fire damp-

ers. 

ii.  Penetration of ducts shall not be allowed without dampers in non sprinklered 

 

buildings. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 272 of 1348 

 

Table 3.6: Horizontal Exits 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

7.  DOORS  

i.  Doors shall be 90 minutes fire resistance rated. 
ii.  Doors shall swing in the direction of egress. 
iii. Two-way swing fire doors with vision glass shall be permitted. 
iv. All doors in horizontal exits shall be self-closing or automatic closing. 
v.  All doors serving horizontal exit shall have approved vision  panel. 

8.  BRIDGES      
SERVING AS  
HORIZONTAL  
EXITS            
BETWEEN       
BUILDINGS  

i.  Bridges serving horizontal exits between buildings shall have fire barrier of 2 

hour fire resistance rating extending vertically from ground or a point 3 m below 
the bridge to a point 3 m above the bridge or to the roofline, whichever is lower 
and horizontally for not less than 3 m to each side of the bridge. 

ii.  Any opening in such fire barriers shall be protected with fire door assemblies or 

fixed fire window assemblies having a 45 minutes fire protection rating. 

iii. Where bridge connects buildings and serves egress in both directions, double 

egress doors shall be provided. 

iv. Every bridge width shall be as wide as the building doors it connects to but in no 

case shall be less than 1200 mm in width. 

v.  Also see Chapter 1, Table 1.9.52. 

Figure 3.14.: Typical Fire Barrier with Horizontal Exits 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 273 of 1348 

3.5.  Smokeproof Enclosures 

 

3.5.1.  Smokeproof enclosure in a means of egress is designed to limit the entry and move-
ment of smoke and products of combustion produced by a fire. This can be achieved 
by using natural ventilation, by using mechanical ventilation incorporating a vestibule, 
or by pressurizing the stair enclosure.  

 
3.5.2.  Smokeproof enclosures shall comply with Table 3.1 and Table 3.7. However, allowance 

of smokeproof enclosures and modifications if provided by individual occupancies sec-
tions, shall override the requirements of  Table 3.7. 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

Table 3.7: Smokeproof Enclosures 

1.  FIRE         

RATING  

i.  A smokeproof enclosure shall be continuously enclosed by barriers having a 2-
hour fire resistance rating from the highest point to the level of exit discharge. 

ii.  When smokeproof enclosure discharges into exit corridor or passageway, the exit 
passageway shall be separated from the remainder of the building by a 2-hour fire 
resistance rating. 

2.  ACCESS   

i.  Access to any smokeproof enclosure shall be through a vestibule or by way of an 

exterior balcony, unless the enclosure is pressurized. 

3.  VESTIBULE 

i.  Where a vestibule is used, it shall be within the 2-hour-rated smokeproof enclo-

(LOBBY)   

sure and shall be considered part of the smokeproof enclosure. 

ii.  Vestibule door separating outside area shall be 90 minutes fire rated. 
iii. Vestibule door connecting smokeproof enclosure shall be 30 minutes fire rated. 
iv. vestibule doors shall be air leak proof and self closing or automatic closing by the 

activation of smoke detector located within 3 m of the vestibule door opening. 

4.  DIRECT          

i.  Every smokeproof enclosure shall discharge into a public way, into a yard or court 

DISCHARGE  

having direct access to a public way. 

ii.  When smokeproof enclosure discharges into exit corridor or passageway, such 

exit passageways shall be without openings, other than the entrance to the 
smokeproof enclosure and the door opening to the outside yard, court, or public 
way.  

iii. When building is sprinklered, such direct discharge from smokeproof enclosure 

shall be 50% of the required number of exits and egress capacity. 

5.  BY              

NATURAL      

VENTILATION 

i.  Every vestibule using natural ventilation shall have a net area of not less than 1.5 
m2 of opening in an exterior wall facing an exterior court, yard, or public space not 
less than 6 m in width. 

ii.  Every vestibule using natural ventilation shall have a minimum dimension of not 
less than the required width of the corridor leading to it and a dimension of not 
less than 1830 mm in the direction of travel. See Chapter 10. Section 2.16. 

6.  BY               

i.  Every vestibule using mechanical ventilation shall have a dimension of not less 

than 1200 mm in width and not less than 1830 mm in the direction of travel. 

ii.  The vestibule shall be provided with not less than one air change per minute and 

the exhaust shall be 150% of the supply. 

iii. Supply air shall enter and exhaust air shall discharge from the vestibule through 

separate tightly constructed dedicated ducts.  

iv. Supply air shall enter the vestibule at lower level, within 150 mm of the floor level. 
The top of the exhaust register shall be located not more than 150 mm below the 
top of the trap and shall be entirely within the smoke trap area.  

v.  Door leaves, when in the open position, shall not obstruct such duct arrange-

ments. See Chapter 10. Section 2.17. 

MECHANICAL      

VENTILATION 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 274 of 1348 

 

Table 3.7: Smokeproof Enclosures 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

7.  BY                       

i.  Smokeproof enclosures using pressurization shall use an approved engi-

PRESSURIZATION 

neered system with a design pressure difference across the barrier of not less 
than 0.05 in. water column (12.5 N/m2) in sprinklered buildings, or 0.10 in. 
water column (25 N/m2) in on sprinklered buildings, and shall be capable of 
maintaining these pressure differences under likely conditions of stack effect 
or wind. 

ii.  The pressure difference across door openings shall not exceed that which 
allows the door leaves to begin to be opened by a force of 30 lbf (133 N)  

iii. See Chapter 10., Section 2.6. for design details. 

Figure 3.15.: Smokeproof Enclosure with Vestibule 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 275 of 1348 

3.6.  Exit passageways  

 

3.6.1.  Exit passageways in a means of egress serves as a horizontal means of exit travel that is 
separated and protected from fire in a manner similar to an enclosed interior exit stair. 
An exit passageway can be used to preserve the continuity of the protected exit by 
connecting the stair that continues to the street floor.  

 
3.6.2.  Probably the most important benefit of an exit passageway is to serve as an extension 

of a protected stair where it is impractical to locate the stair on an exterior wall, by 
connecting to the exit of stair to transfer the occupants safely to an outside exit door. 

 
3.6.3.  Exit passageway also serve the buildings of extremely large area, such as shopping 

malls and some factories, where travel distances to reach exits would be too excessive 
to meet the restrictions, by connecting exit stairs at distances more than allowed travel 
distances. 

 
3.6.4.  Exit passageways shall comply with Table 3.1 and Table 3.8. However, allowance of 
Exit passageways and modifications if provided by individual occupancies as per Sec-
tion 5, shall override the requirements of Table 3.8. 

Table 3.8: Exit passageways  

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  FIRE RATING  

i.  Every Exit passageways in Low depth and Low rise buildings (having height up 

2.  WIDTH   

to 15 m), shall be separated from rest of the building areas by a construction to 
ensure 1 hour fire resistance rating. 

ii.  Every Exit passageways in High depth, Mid rise and High rise buildings (having 
height more than 15 m), shall be separated from rest of the building areas by a 
construction to ensure 2 hour fire resistance rating. 

iii. Separation shall extend vertically from the finished floor level to the ceiling, 

providing complete enclosure for the exit corridor. 

i.  The width of an exit passageway shall be sized to accommodate the aggregate 
required capacity of all exits that discharge through it except for Malls where 
occupants loads of Mall and tenant spaces are not required to be aggregated. 
ii.  Minimum of 1200 mm shall be provided for every exit corridor, unless the in-

creased width is demanded by the egress width calculation based on occupant 
load and as required by the individual occupancies. 

iii. Exit corridor shall maintain a minimum width of 2/3 of the stair width, unless 

where stair widths are required to be higher based on egress capacity de-
mands and shall not reduce in width along the egress path. 

3.  WINDOWS   

i.  Approved and listed Fire rated windows shall be permitted to be installed on 

exit passageway walls only if the building is sprinklered. 

4.  VALID EXIT  PAS-

i.  Access to an exit shall not be through kitchens, storerooms, or other rooms or 

SAGEWAYS  

spaces subject to locking. See Figure 3.16.c. for not acceptable Exit passage-
ways. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 276 of 1348 

 

 

Figure 3.16.a.: Exit Passageway, an extension for Exit Stair to compensate for excess travel distance 

Figure 3.16.b.: Exit Passageway, an extension of Exit Stair to Exit Discharge 

Figure 3.16.c.: Not acceptable Exit Corridors and Exit Passageways 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 277 of 1348 

3.7.  Ramps 

 

3.7.1.  Ramps used as means of egress shall comply with Table 3.1 and Table 3.9. However, 

allowance and modifications of ramps, if provided by individual occupancies as per  
Section 5, shall override the requirements of Table 3.9. 

Table 3.9: Ramps 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  RAMP WIDTH  

i.  The minimum width of a ramp shall not be less than 1200 mm. 
ii.  Ramp width shall not decrease in width along the direction of egress travel. 

2.  SLOPE  

i.  Maximum slope of a ramp shall not exceed 1 in 12 ratio. 
ii.  Maximum cross slope of a ramp shall not exceed 1 in 48 ratio. 

3.  RISE  

i.  Maximum rise of a single ramp run shall not exceed 760 mm. 

4.  PROJECTIONS  

i.  Maximum projections allowed on ramp shall not exceed 114 mm at or below 

handrail height. 

5.  CONSTRUCTION  

i.  Ramps serving as means of egress shall be of permanent fixed construction. 
ii.  Ramps shall be constructed of non combustible or limited combustible mate-

6.  LANDINGS  

rial. 

iii. Where fire-retardant-treated wood is used for ramp construction, its height 
shall not exceed 760 mm and shall not have an area more than 277 m2 and it 
shall not occupy 50% of the room area it is serving. 

i.  Landing shall have same width as that of ramp. 
ii.  Ramp floor and landings shall be solid and without perforations. 
iii. Ramps shall have landings located at the top, at the bottom, and at door 

leaves opening onto the ramp. 

iv. The slope of the landing shall be not steeper than 1 in 48. 
v.  Landing dimension shall not be less than 1525 mm in the direction of travel. 
vi. If ramp is not part of an accessible route and has straight run, the landing 

dimension shall not be less than 1220 mm in the direction of travel. 

vii.Any changes in ramp direction shall be made only at landing. 

7.  DROP-OFFS  

i.  Ramps and landings with drop-offs shall have curbs, walls, railings, or pro-

jecting surfaces that prevent people from traveling off the edge of the ramp.  

ii.  Curbs or barriers shall be not less than 100 mm in height. 

8.  GUARDS AND 

i.  Shall comply with Table 3.4.10 and 3.4.11. 

HANDRAILS  

9.  ENCLOSURE 

i.  Shall comply with Table 3.4.7. 

10.  OUTSIDE RAMP 

i.  Outside ramps shall be arranged to avoid any impediments to their use by 
persons having a fear of high places. Outside ramps more than 11 m above 
the finished ground level shall be provided with an opaque visual obstruction 
not less than 1220 mm in height. 

ii.  Outside ramps and landings shall be designed to minimize water accumula-

tion on their surfaces. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 278 of 1348 

3.8.  Area of Refuge 

 

3.8.1.  Area of Refuge is not mandated by Civil Defence. However, for super high rise buildings 
(having height more than 90 m), or any large complex buildings, if the overall fire strat-
egy demands an area of refuge as part of the means of egress and an area of refuge for 
disabled occupants, the area of refuge shall comply with this section. 

 
 3.8.2.  Area of Refuge is intended to provide temporary point of safety to allow delayed 

egress travel from any level in the building and also serve disabled occupants to have 
temporary refuge. 

 
 3.8.3.  Area of Refuge used as means of egress shall comply with Table 3.1 and Table 3.10.  

Table 3.10: Area of Refuge 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  SEPARATION  

i.  Area of refuge shall be separated from remainder of the storey by a fire barrier 

having minimum of 1 hour fire resistance rating. 

ii.  Ducts penetrating such barrier shall be provided with smoke actuated dampers. 

2.  DOORS  

i.  Doors serving area of refuge shall be 45 minutes fire rated, air leak proof, self clos-

ing or automatic closing.  

3.  EXITS  

i.  An Area Of Refuge shall have protected stair access leading to an accessible storey 

that is one or more stories above or below a storey of exit discharge of the build-
ing, available which is not the same as access into to area of refuge, such that 
egress continues from area of refuge without requiring return to the building 
spaces through which travel to the area of refuge occurred. 

ii.  The width of the protected stair required from area of refuge shall accommodate 

the occupant load that the area of refuge is designed. But in no case less than 
1200 mm. 

4.  AREA 

i.  Area of refuge in a  building shall be based on a clear fire strategy or a minimum  

area calculated based on occupants of 3 floors. 

ii.  Area of refuge shall be sized to accommodate one wheelchair space of                    

760 mm × 1220 mm for every 200 occupants, or portion thereof, based on the 
occupant load served by the area of refuge.  

iii. Such wheelchair spaces shall maintain the width of a means of egress to not less 

than that required for the occupant load served and  to not less than 915 mm. 

i.  Area of refuge is preferred to be in fully sprinkler protected building. 
ii.  Each elevator landing shall be provided with a two-way communication system, 

complete with using instructions in Arabic and English to seek assistance, contact 
numbers etc., for communication between the elevator landing and the fire com-
mand center or a central control point. Two way communication system shall 
have both audio and visual signals. 

i.  If area of refuge has an elevator and provides access from area of refuge to a  
public way, it shall be a fire fighter’s lift in smokeproof shaft with fire fighters 
emergency operations as per ASME A17.1/CSA B44, Safety Code for Elevators and 
Escalators.  

ii.  The power supply to elevator shall be protected against interruption from fire. 

5.  FIRE            

SYSTEMS 

6.  ELEVATOR 

7.  HORIZONTAL 

i.  If area of refuge is created by horizontal exit as per Table 3.6., smokeproof enclo-

EXIT 

sure for elevator shaft is not required. 

8.  SIGNAGE 

i.  Every Area of refuge shall be identified by a sign, both in Arabic and English as 

 

“AREA OF REFUGE” 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 279 of 1348 

3.9.  Elevator Evacuation 

 

3.9.1.  Use of elevators for emergency evacuation is inevitable in tall and super high rise 

buildings. International codes and standards are under development process to pre-
scribe minimum requirements on elevators as means of egress.  

 
3.9.2.  Civil Defence has considered elevators as means 

of egress for delayed egress, phased evacua-
tion and controlled evacuation under supervi-
sion of trained facility management or Civil 
Defence personnel during emergencies.  

 
3.9.2.  Elevators shall be considered as component 
of means of egress but shall not compensate 
for required number of exits nor required exit 
capacity. 

 
  3.8.3.  Elevators used as means of egress shall comply 

Did You Know? 

Though traditionally evacuation 

using elevators is discouraged, the 

9/11 incident investigation and trend 

of Super Highrise living and work-

ing spaces, there is a level of ac-

ceptance of Elevators as means of 

evacuation.  

with  Table 3.11. Also see Chapter 1, Table 1.9.38. , Chapter 1, Figure 1.8.  Chapter 2, 
Section 2.9.4. 

Table 3.11: Elevator as Means of Egress 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  ASSISTED      

i.  Unless evacuation is assisted by facility management and Civil Defence rescue 

EVACUATION  

team, elevators shall not be used for evacuation, unless alternatives are ap-
proved by Civil Defence. 

ii.  The elevator evacuation strategy, procedure, responsibilities of parties in-

volved  shall be preplanned and documented by facility management. 

2.  PREREQUISITES 

i.  Building shall be fully sprinklered. 
ii.  Elevator shall be provided with a lobby.  
iii. Elevator shafts shall be pressurized.  
iv. Elevator shall have two-way communication system. 
v.  Voice evacuation system shall be clearly audible in the elevator lobby. 
vi. Wiring for elevator equipment, elevator car lighting, lobby pressurization shall 

be 2 hour fire rated. 

3.  WATER                

i.  Elevators shall be water resistant and listed and approved as per ASME A17.1/

RESISTANCE  

4.  EMERGENCY 

POWER 

CSA B44, Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators. 

i.  Elevators shall have emergency power backup. 
ii.  Shunt breakers shall not be installed on elevator systems. 

5.  CONFIGURATION 

i.  Elevators shall have over riding key feature which enables rescue teams to 

resume power supply to elevator, over ride the selection of destination floor, 
door opening, door closure or Phase I recall to designated discharge floor. 

ii.  Emergency Command Center shall be provided with the means to manually 
initiate a Phase I Emergency Recall of the occupant evacuation elevators in 
accordance with ASME A17.1/CSA B44. 

iii. During power failure, elevator shall return to designated discharge level. 
iv. The activation of smoke detectors or pre-action sprinkler system at the eleva-
tor machine room shall disable power supply and all features of elevator evac-
uation. And elevator shall not be available for evacuation. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 280 of 1348 

3.10. Exit Discharge 

 

3.10.1.  Exit discharge or Discharge from exit is defined as providing building occupants with a 

safe path of travel from an exit to a public way.   

 
3.10.2.  Exits shall terminate directly, at a public way or at an exterior exit discharge, unless 

otherwise provided in Table 3.12.  

 
3.10.3.  Exit Discharge in means of egress shall comply with Table 3.1 and Table 3.12.  

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

Table 3.12.: Exit Discharge 

1.  NUMBER OF       

i.  For sprinkler protected buildings, minimum of 50 % of the required number of 

DIRECT        
DISCHARGE 
EXITS TO     
OUTSIDE 

exits, and minimum of 50 % of the required egress capacity, shall discharge direct-
ly to the outside of the building through yards, courts, open spaces or similar 
spaces to open to sky, leading to public way or directly to a public way.  

ii.  For non-sprinklered buildings, 100% of the required number of exits, and 100% of 

the required egress capacity, shall discharge directly to outside the building 
through yards, courts, open spaces or similar spaces to open to sky, leading to 
public way or directly to a public way  

i.  In sprinklered buildings, not more than 50% of the required number of exit, and 

2.  DISCHARGE 
THROUGH    
INTERIOR OF       
BUILDING  

not more than 50% of required exit capacities are permitted to discharge through 
interior building areas such as lobbies and corridors. 

ii.  The interior exit discharge shall lead to a free and unobstructed way to the exteri-

or of the building, and such way shall be readily visible and identifiable from the 
point of discharge from the exit. 

3.  LOCATION 

i.  Direct discharge shall be directly towards the public way and not at the back of 
the building where occupants still need to travel across the building exterior to 
reach point of safety of public way. 

4.  DISTANCE   
BETWEEN  
POINTS OF 
EXIT           
DISCHARGE 

i.  In sprinklered buildings, distance between point of exit discharges to outside shall 

not be less than 1/3 (One-third) of the largest measurement of building diagonal 
distance. 

ii.  In non-sprinklered buildings, distance between point of exit discharges to outside 
shall not be less than 1/2 (One-half) of the largest measurement of building diago-
nal distance. 

iii. Exit discharges shall not be next to each other with common walls or fire walls. 

The points of Exit Discharges shall be separated from each other by a distance as 
per 3.12.4.i and ii. 

5.  PROTECTION 

i.  An exit passageway that serves as a discharge from a stair enclosure shall be sepa-

rated from other parts of the building by construction having the same fire re-
sistance rating as those required for the stair enclosure. 

ii.  Areas having exit discharge through interior building spaces shall be protected 

with sprinklers. 

iii. The entire area on the level of discharge shall be separated from areas below by 
construction having a fire resistance rating not less than that required for the exit 
enclosure. 

iv. Levels below the level of discharge in an atrium shall be permitted to be open to 

the level of discharge where such level of discharge is protected by sprinklers, fire 
rated construction and smoke partitions or an engineered smoke control system.  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 281 of 1348 

Table 3.12.: Exit Discharge 

ITEMS 

iREQUIREMENTS 

6.  DISCHARGE 

i.  Discharge to roof is allowed only if the building is sprinklered and a continuous 

TO ROOF 

and safe means of egress from the roof is available. Additionally, the roof/ceiling 
assembly construction shall have a fire resistance rating not less than that re-
quired for the exit enclosure.  

7.  SEPARATION 

i.  Stairs that continue to levels below the level of exit discharge, shall be interrupt-

AT LEVEL OF      
DISCHARGE  

ed at the level of exit discharge by partitions, walls or fences, such that occupants 
are guided outside the exit discharge and do not continue using stairs and miss 
the level of exit discharge. 

8.  MARKING  

i.  The exit discharge shall be arranged and marked to make clear the level of exit 

discharge, direction of egress to a public way. Stairs markings shall be arranged so 
as to make clear the level and direction of egress to a public way.  

 

Figure 3.17..: Exit Separation between discharge from basement and discharge from floors above 

Figure 3.18.: Exit Discharge Sign inside Stair enclosure at Exit Discharge Level 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 282 of 1348 

4.   Capacity of Means of Egress  

 

4.1.  The Occupant Load 
 

4.1.1.  The Occupant Load is the total number of people or occupants that might occupy a 

building or portion thereof at any one time.  

 
4.1.2.  The occupant load in any building or portion thereof shall be not less than the number 
of persons determined by dividing the floor area assigned to that use by the occupant 
load factor for that use as specified in Table 3.13. All areas mentioned in table are 
“gross” unless mentioned as “net”. 

 
4.1.3.  Where an exit serves more than one storey, only the occupant load of each storey con-
sidered individually shall be used in computing the required capacity of the exit at that 
storey, provided that the required egress capacity of the exit is not decreased in the 
direction of egress travel. 

 

4.2.  Egress Capacity 
 

4.2.1.  The total capacity of the means of egress for any storey, balcony, tier, or other occu-

pied space shall be sufficient for the occupant load thereof. 

 
4.2.2.  Where more than one means of egress exist in a building, the means of egress shall be 

of such width and capacity that the loss of any one means of egress leaves available 
not less than 50% of the required capacity. 

 
4.2.3.  Where means of egress from a storey above and a storey below converge at an inter-

mediate storey, the capacity of the means of egress from the point of convergence 
shall be not less than the sum of the required capacity of the two means of egress. 

 

4.2.4.  The required capacity of a corridor shall be based on the occupant load that utilizes the 

corridor for exit access divided by the required number of exits to which the corridor 
connects, but the corridor capacity shall be not less than the required capacity of the 
exit to which the corridor leads. 

 
4.2.5.  Where a single exit access leads to an exit, its capacity in terms of width shall be not 

less than the required capacity of the exit to which it leads. 

 
4.2.6.  Where more than one exit access leads to an exit, each exit shall have a width ade-

quate for the number of persons it accommodates. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 283 of 1348 

 

4.2.7.  Where any required egress capacity from a balcony or mezzanine passes through the 
room below, that required capacity shall be added to the required egress capacity of 
the room in which it is located. 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
4.2.8.

Figure 3.19.: Egress Capacity from mezzanine is added to the Building floor Capacity 

 Street floor exits shall be sufficient for the occupant load of the street floor plus the 
required capacity of stairs and ramps discharging through the street floor. However, in 
case of exits merging from above and below street level, the egress capacity of street 
floor occupants shall not be added to that of the merging exits.   

 
4.2.9.  The width of means of egress shall be measured in the clear at the narrowest point of 

the egress component under consideration. 

 
4.2.10.  Projections within the means of egress of not more than 114 mm on each side shall be 
permitted at a 965 mm height from finished floor level and below.  In the case of stair 
and landing handrails forming part of a guard, such projections shall be permitted at a 
height of 1065 mm.  

 
4.2.11.  Means of egress shall be continuously maintained free of all obstructions or impedi-

ments to full instant use in the case of fire or other emergency.  

 
4.2.12.  Egress Capacities for various components and various occupancies shall be as per    

Table 3.13. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 284 of 1348 

 

Table 3.13.: Occupant Load Factors and Exit Capacity Factors 

OCCUPANCY 

OCCUPANT LOAD  
FACTOR 
PER PERSON 

STAIR  
WIDTH 
PER PERSON 

RAMP  
WIDTH  
PER PERSON 

1. ASSEMBLY, GROUP A,B,C. 

i.      Concentrated (Ballroom, Dance 

floor, Prayer rooms etc.) 

ii.     Less Concentrated, Outdoors etc. 
(Meeting rooms, Restaurant, Out-
doors etc.) 

iii.    Bench Seatings,  

iv.    Fixed Seatings 

v.     Waiting Spaces in theaters, similar 

spaces 

vi.    Kitchens 

vii.   Library Stacks area 

viii.  Library Reading rooms 

ix.    Swimming Pool 

x.     Swimming Pool Decks 

xi.    Exercise Room with Equipment 

xii.    Exercise Room without Equipment 

 
0.65 m2, net 
0.9 m2, net for prayer 
rooms 
1.4 m2, net 

455 mm linear 

Number of fixed seats 
0.28 m2   

9.3 m2 
9.3 m2 
4.6 m2, net 
4.6 m2  Water surface 
2.8 m2   
4.6 m2   
1.4 m2   

xiii.   Stages 

xiv.   Lighting and Access Catwalks 

xv.    Casinos and Gaming areas 

xvi.   Skating Rinks 

xvii.   Food Court Seating areas 

xviii.   Airport Concourse 

xix.   Airport Waiting areas 

xx.    Airport Baggage Claim 

xxi.   Airport Baggage Handling 

xxii.   Theater-Type Seating 
 

xxiii.   Museum 

2. BUSINESS,  GROUP A,B,C. 

i.   Regular Office areas 

ii.  Concentrated Office areas 

iii.  Air Traffic Control observation levels 

3. EDUCATIONAL , GROUP A,B,C. 

i.   Classroom 

 
i.   Shops, Laboratories, Vocational etc. 

1.4, net 

9.3, net 
1 m2   
4.6 m2   
1.4 m2 
9.3 m2 
1.4 m2   
1.9 m2   
27.9 m2   

Number of fixed seats 

5.0 m2   

 
9.3 m2 
4.6 m2 
3.7 m2 

 

1.9, net 

4.6, net 

 

 

7.6 mm 

5 mm 

7.6 mm 

5 mm 

7.6 mm 

7.6 mm 

7.6 mm 

7.6 mm 

7.6 mm 

7.6 mm 

7.6 mm 

7.6 mm 

7.6 mm 

7.6 mm 

7.6 mm 

7.6 mm 

7.6 mm 

7.6 mm 

7.6 mm 

7.6 mm 

7.6 mm 

7.6 mm 

7.6 mm 

7.6 AB  
See Table 
1.17.3. 

7.6 mm 

 

7.6 mm 

7.6 mm 

7.6 mm 

 

7.6 mm 

7.6 mm 

5 mm 

5 mm 

5 mm 

5 mm 

5 mm 

5 mm 

5 mm 

5 mm 

5 mm 

5 mm 

5 mm 

5 mm 

5 mm 

5 mm 

5 mm 

5 mm 

5 mm 

5 mm 

5 mm 

5.6 C 
See Table 
1.17.3. 

5 mm 

 

5 mm 

5 mm 

5 mm 

 

5 mm 

5 mm 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 285 of 1348 

Table 3.13.: Occupant Load Factors and Exit Capacity Factors 

OCCUPANCY 

OCCUPANT LOAD  
FACTOR 
PER PERSON 

STAIR  
CAPACITY 
PER PERSON 

RAMP  
CAPACITY  
PER PERSON 

4. HEALTHCARE GROUP A,B 

i.    Inpatient treatment departments 

ii.   Sleeping departments 

iii.  Consultation departments 

iv.  Clinics 

v.  Limited Care 

 

22.3 m2   

11.1 m2   

9.3 m2   

9.3 m2   

9.3 m2   

vi.  Both sides of Smoke Compartment 

2.8 m2 , net 

5. HEALTHCARE GROUP C 

i. Ambulatory Health care 

6. RESIDENTIAL GROUP A 

i. Apartments 

7. RESIDENTIAL GROUP B, C 

i. Staff Accommodation, Hostels 

i. Labor Accommodation 

8. PRIVATE  VILLA 

9. COMMERCIAL VILLA 

10. DETENTION , GROUP A,B,C. 

11. HOTEL 

i. Hotel Apartments 

i. Hotel  Guest rooms 

 

13 m2   

 

18.6 m2   

 

18.6 m2   

18.6 m2   

None 

None 

11.1 m2   

 

18.6 m2   

18.6 m2   

12. DAY CARE, GROUP A,B 

3.3 m2 , net 

13. MERCANTILE, GROUP A,B,C. 

 

i. Sales area on floor below street floor 

ii. Sales area on street floor 

iii. Sales area on floors above street floor 

2.8 m2   

2.8 m2   

5.6 m2   

iv. Sales area on two or more street floors  3.7 m2   

v. Floors used only for offices 

vi. Floors used for goods and not public 

9.3 m2   

27.9 m2   

 

 

 

7.6 mm 

7.6 mm 

7.6 mm 

7.6 mm 

7.6 mm 

7.6 mm 

 

 

5 mm 

5 mm 

5 mm 

5 mm 

5 mm 

5 mm 

 

7.6 mm 

5 mm 

 

 

7.6 mm 

5 mm 

 

7.6 mm 

7.6 mm 

None 

None 

7.6 mm 

 

7.6 mm 

7.6 mm 

10 mm 

 

7.6 mm 

7.6 mm 

7.6 mm 

7.6 mm 

7.6 mm 

7.6 mm 

 

5 mm 

5 mm 

None 

None 

5 mm 

 

5 mm 

5 mm 

5 mm 

 

5 mm 

5 mm 

5 mm 

5 mm 

5 mm 

5 mm 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 286 of 1348 

 

Table 3.13.: Occupant Load Factors and Exit Capacity Factors 

OCCUPANCY 

OCCUPANT LOAD  
FACTOR 
PER PERSON 

STAIR  
CAPACITY 
PER PERSON 

RAMP  
CAPACITY  
PER PERSON 

14. MALL, GROUP A,B 

i. Mall  gross leasable area less than 

14,000 m2   

 

2.8 m2   

 

 

7.6 mm 

5 mm 

ii. Mall gross leasable area of 14,000 m2    3.3 m2   

7.6 mm 

iii. Increment of every 1,290 m2  (Approx.)  0.1 m2  added to 3.3 m2   

7.6 mm 

5 mm 

5 mm 

Max 5.1  m2   

15. STORAGE, GROUP A 

 

 

 

i. High Hazard Storage 

27.9 m2   

18 mm 

10 mm 

16. STORAGE, GROUP B,C. 

 

 

 

i. Low and Ordinary Hazard Storage 

27.9 m2   

7.6 mm 

5 mm 

 

 

 

 

18 mm 

10 mm 

 

7.6 mm 

7.6 mm 

 

7.6 mm 

7.6 mm 

 

7.6 mm 

7.6 mm 

 

 

5 mm 

5 mm 

 

5 mm 

5 mm 

 

5 mm 

5 mm 

 

 

17. INDUSTRIAL, GROUP A 

i. High Hazard content 

 

 

9.3 m2   

18. INDUSTRIAL, GROUP B,C. 

 

9.3 m2   

NA  

 

27.9 m2   

27.9 m2   

 

46.5 m2   

11.1 m2   

 

i. General, Low Hazard 

ii. Special Purpose 

19. PARKING, GROUP A,B 

i. Enclosed parkings 

ii. Open parkings 

20. PARKING, GROUP C 

i. Mechanical/Robotic parkings 

21. ANIMAL HOUSING, GROUP A,B,C. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 287 of 1348 

4.3.  Number of Means of Egress 
 

4.3.1.  Minimum number of means of egress from any storey or portion thereof shall be as 

per Table 3.14. 

Table 3.14.: Required Number of Means of Egress 

CRITERIA 

i. ANY BUILDING, FLOOR, STOREY 

ii. OCCUPANT LOAD LESS THAN 500 

iii. OCCUPANT LOAD 500 - 1000 

iv. OCCUPANT LOAD MORE THAN 1000 

NUMBER OF EXITS 

Minimum 2 Means of Egress 

Minimum 2 Exits 

Not less than 3 Exits 

Not less than 4 Exits 

v. BALCONY, MEZZANINE,  

Minimum 2 Means of Egress 

vi. OCCUPANT LOAD MORE THAN 6000 AT OUTDOORS 

Not less than 3 Exits 

vii. OCCUPANT LOAD MORE THAN 9000 AT OUTDOORS 

Not less than 4 Exits 

 

4.4.  Remoteness of Means of Egress 
 

4.4.1.  Exits shall be located, and exit access shall be arranged, so that exits are readily acces-

sible at all times. 

 
4.4.2.  Where exits are not immediately accessible from an open floor area, continuous pas-

sageways, aisles, or corridors leading directly to every exit shall be maintained and 
shall be arranged to provide access for each occupant to not less than two exits by sep-
arate ways of travel, unless single exits are permitted as per individual occupancies. 

 
4.4.3.  Exit access corridors shall provide access to not less than two approved exits, unless 

single exits are permitted as per individual occupancies. 

 
4.4.4.  Exits, Exit access, or Exit Discharge shall be remotely located from each other and be 

arranged to minimize the possibility that more than one has the potential to be 
blocked by any one fire or other emergency condition. 

 
4.4.5.  Remoteness of Exit arrangement in buildings shall be as per Table 3.15.a. 

Table 3.15.a.: Remoteness of Means of Egress 

BUILDING 

EXIT REMOTENESS   MEASUREMENT OF DISTANCE 

i. LOWRISE, SPRINKLERED 

1/3 of floor diagonal 

Shortest walking distance between exits 

ii. LOWRISE, NON SPRINKLERED 

1/2 of floor diagonal 

Shortest walking distance between exits 

iii. MIDRISE, SPRINKLERED 

1/3 of floor diagonal 

Shortest walking distance between exits 

iv. MIDRISE, NON SPRINKLERED 

1/2 of floor diagonal 

Shortest walking distance between exits 

v. HIGHRISE, SPRINKLERED 

1/3 of floor diagonal 

Straight line between center of exit doors 

vi. SUPER HIGHRISE, SPRINKLERED  1/3 of floor diagonal  

Straight line between center of exit doors 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 288 of 1348 

 

4.4.6.  Measurement of remoteness of Exit arrangement in buildings required by Table 3.15. 

for Lowrise and Midrise buildings shall be as per Figure 3.20.a. 

 
4.4.7.  However, the allowance of measuring remoteness by walking distance between exits 

shall not apply where the arrangement of means of egress is blocked by any one fire or 
emergency condition which prevents the access to both the exits. 

 
4.4.8.  Required exit remoteness shall also be required where exits are connected by looped 

corridors or passageways. 

Figure 3.20.a.: Lowrise and Midrise building exit separation 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 289 of 1348 

 

4.4.7.  Measurement of remoteness of Exit arrangement in buildings required by Table 

3.15.a. for Super Highrise and Highrise buildings shall be as per Figure 3.20.b. 

Figure 3.20.b.: Super Highrise, Highrise sprinklered building exit separation 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 290 of 1348 

4.4.8.  Remoteness of exits as per Table 3.15.a. shall not apply to  basements and podiums 

where the area is only used for parking vehicles, generator rooms, server rooms, 
battery rooms and service rooms, provided the travel distance requirements of 61m 
are met. The remoteness of stairs in such podiums and basements shall be as per Table 
3.15.b. 

 
4.4.9.  Measurement of remoteness of Exit arrangement in buildings required by                   
Table 3.15.b. for basements and podiums used for parking of vehicles shall be as per 
Figure 3.20.c. 

Table 3.15.b.: Remoteness of Means of Egress at Basements and Podiums used for parking 

BUILDING 

EXIT REMOTENESS  

MEASUREMENT OF    
DISTANCE 

i.  BASEMENT AND ENCLOSED PODIUM 

USED ONLY FOR VEHICLE PARKING 
AND SERVICE ROOMS,                             
WITH SPRINKLER PROTECTION 

Maximum of 61 m of travel path 
from most remote point to exit 
door. Dead end and Commonpath 
shall not exceed 15 m. 

Walking distance from 
most remote parking lot, 
along the natural path of 
travel to an exit. 

ii.  BASEMENT AND ENCLOSED PODIUM 

USED ONLY FOR VEHICLE PARKING 
AND SERVICE ROOMS,                     
NON-SPRINKLERED 

Maximum of 46 m of travel path 
from most remote point to exit 
door. Dead end and Commonpath 
shall not exceed 15 m. 

Walking distance from 
most remote parking lot, 
along the natural path of 
travel to an exit. 

iii.  OPEN PODIUM USED ONLY FOR         

VEHICLE PARKING AND SERVICE 
ROOMS,                                                 
SPRINKLERED 

Maximum of 122 m of travel path 
from most remote point to exit 
door. Dead end and Commonpath 
shall not exceed 15 m. 

Walking distance from 
most remote parking lot, 
along the natural path of 
travel to an exit. 

iv.  OPEN PODIUM USED ONLY FOR  
VEHICLE PARKING AND SERVICE 
ROOMS,                                                   
NON-SPRINKLERED 

Maximum of 122 m of travel path 
from most remote point to exit 
door. Dead end and Commonpath 
shall not exceed 15 m. 

Walking distance from 
most remote parking lot, 
along the natural path of 
travel to an exit. 

Figure 3.20.c.: Exit separation requirements for Basements and Podiums used for parkings 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 291 of 1348 

 

4.5.  Commonpath, Dead end and Travel Distance 
 

4.5.1.  Exit access shall be arranged such that there are no dead ends or dead ends are within 

allowable length in corridors. 

 
4.5.2.  The travel distance to an exit shall be measured on the floor or other walking surface 

shall be along the centerline of the natural path of travel, starting from the most re-
mote point subject to occupancy, terminating at the center of the doorway or other 
exits and keeping a distance of 305 mm clearance from corner, curves and obstruc-
tions.  

 
4.5.3.  Where measurement includes stairs, the measurement shall be taken in the plane of 

the tread nosing. 

 
4.5.4.  Limitations of Commanpath, Dead ends and Travel Distance in buildings shall be as per 

Table 3.16. Where “S” is building protected by sprinkler system, “NS” is building not  
protected with sprinkler system, “NR” is No Requirements and “NA” is Not Applicable. 

Figure 3.21.a.: Commonpath 

Figure 3.21.b.: Dead End 

Figure 3.21.c.: Travel Distance 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 292 of 1348 

Table 3.16.: Commonpath, Dead end and Travel Distances 

OCCUPANCY 

COMMONPATH  DEAD END 

TRAVEL       
DISTANCE  

1. ASSEMBLY, GROUP A,B,C. 

 

 

 

i.      50 people or less 

S 23 m,   NS 23 m 

S 6.1 m,  NS 6.1 m  S 76 m,    NS 61 m 

ii.     More than 50 people 

S 6.1 m,  NS 6.1 m 

S 6.1 m,  NS 6.1 m  S 76 m,    NS 61 m 

iii.     Smoke Protected Seating area 

S 15 m,   NS 6.1 m 

S 21 rows of seats  S 122 m,   NS 61 m 

iv.     Exhibition booth to Exit access 

S 15 m,    NS 15 m 

S 0 m       NS 0 m 

S 15 m,    NS 15 m 

2. BUSINESS,  GROUP A,B,C. 

 

 

 

i.    Regular Office areas 

S 30 m,   NS 23 m 

S 15 m,   NS 6.1 m  S 91 m,    NS 61 m 

iii.  Air Traffic Control observation levels 

3. EDUCATIONAL , GROUP A,B,C. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

i.   Classroom 

S 30 m,   NS 23 m 

S 15 m,   NS 6.1 m  S 61 m,    NS 46 m 

i.   Shops, Laboratories, Vocational etc. 

S 30 m,   NS 23 m 

S 15 m,   NS 6.1 m  S 76 m,    NS 46 m 

4. HEALTHCARE GROUP A,B 

i.   Hospitals, Sleeping areas 

 

S 30 m  

 

 

S 9.1 m 

S 61 m 

ii.  Clinics, Consultancy areas 

S 30 m,   NS 23 m 

S 15 m,   NS 6.1 m  S 91 m,    NS 61 m 

iii.  Inside Suite to suite exit door 

iv.  Inside Suite to exit /exit stair 

v.  Any sleeping room to its main door 

5. HEALTHCARE GROUP C 

NA 

NA 

NA 

 

NA 

NA 

NA 

 

S 30 m,   NS 30 m 

S 61 m,   NS 61 m 

S 15 m,   NS 15 m 

 

i. Ambulatory Health care 

S 30 m,   NS 23 m 

S 15 m,   NS 6.1 m  S 61 m,    NS 46 m 

6. RESIDENTIAL GROUP A 

 

 

 

i. Apartment Main door to exit 

S 15 m,   NS 10.7 m  S 15 m, NS 10.7 m  S 61 m,    NS 30 m 

ii. Within Apartment to Main door 

S 38 m,   NS 23 m 

NA 

S 38 m,   NS 23 m 

iii. Apartment Main door to Outside Stair  S 15 m,   NS 10.7 m  S 15 m, NS 10.7 m  S 61 m,   NS 30 m 

iv. Other than dwelling units to Exit Stair 

S 15 m,   NS 10.7 m  S 15 m, NS 10.7 m  S 76 m,   NS 61 m 

7. RESIDENTIAL GROUP B, C 

 

 

 

i.  Staff Accommodation, Hostels 

S 15 m,   NS 10.7 m  S 15 m, NS 10.7 m  S 76 m,    NS 61 m 

ii. Labor Accommodation 

S 15 m,   NS 10.7 m  S 15 m, NS 10.7 m  S 76 m,    NS 61 m 

NA 

NA 

 

NA 

NA 

 

NA 

NA 

 

8. PRIVATE  VILLA 

9. COMMERCIAL VILLA 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 293 of 1348 

 

Table 3.16.: Commonpath, Dead end and Travel Distances 

OCCUPANCY 

COMMONPATH  DEAD END 

TRAVEL       
DISTANCE  

10. DETENTION , GROUP A,B,C. 

 

 

 

i.  For Types II, III, IV 

ii.  For Types V 

S 30 m,   NS 15 m 

S 15 m,   NS 6.1 m  S 61 m,    NS 46 m 

S 30 m,   NS 15 m 

S 6.1 m,  NS 6.1 m  S 61 m,    NS 46 m 

iii.  Any room exit access door to Exit 

S 30 m,   NS 15 m 

S 15 m,   NS 6.1 m  S 46 m,    NS 46 m 

11. HOTEL 

 

 

 

i. Hotel guest room Main door to exit 

S 15 m,   NS 10.7 m  S 15 m, NS 10.7 m  S 61 m,    NS 53 m 

i. Within Guest room to Main door 

12. DAY CARE, GROUP A, B 

NA 

 

NA 

 

S 38 m,    NS 23 m 

 

i. From any room door to exit door 

S 30 m,   NS 23 m 

S 15 m,   NS 6.1 m  S 46 m,    NS 30 m 

ii. From any point in room to exit door 

S 30 m,   NS 23 m 

S 15 m,   NS 6.1 m  S 61 m,    NS 46 m 

iii. From any point in room to room door  NA 

13. MERCANTILE, GROUP A,B,C. 

 

NA 

 

S 30 m,    NS 15 m 

 

i.  For Class A,B,C  

ii.  For Open air 

S 30 m,   NS 23 m 

S 15 m,   NS 6.1 m  S 76 m,    NS 46 m 

S 0 m,      NS 0 m 

S 0 m,      NS 0 m  NA 

iii.  High Hazard Mercantile 

S 0 m,   NS 0 m 

S 15 m,   NS 6.1 m  S 23 m,    NS 23 m 

14. MALL, GROUP A 

 

 

 

i.  Covered Mall 

S 30 m,   NS 23 m 

S 15 m,   NS 6.1 m  S 120 m,   NS 46 m 

Ii. Within Tenant space, where provided 
with pedestrian way is provided as per 
Table 3.33.2. 

S 30 m,   NS 23 m 

S 15 m,   NS 6.1 m  S 76 m,   NS 46 m 

15. MALL, GROUP B 

 

 

 

i.  Open Air Mall 

S 0 m,      NS 0 m 

S 0 m,      NS 0 m  NA 

16. STORAGE, GROUP A 

 

 

 

i. High Hazard Storage 

S 0 m,      NS 0 m 

S 0 m,      NS 0 m 

S 30 m,   NS 23 m 

17. STORAGE, GROUP B,C. 

 

 

 

i.  Low Hazard Storage 

S 30 m,   NS 15 m 

S 30 m,   NS 15 m  S 122 m,   NS 61 m 

ii. Ordinary Hazard Storage 

S 30 m,   NS 15 m 

S 30 m,   NS 15 m  S 122 m,   NS 61 m 

iii. Aircraft Storage, ground floor 

S 30 m,   NS 15 m 

S 15 m,   NS 15 m  S 30 m,    NS 23 m 

iii. Aircraft Storage, Mezzanine floor 

S 30 m,   NS 15 m 

S 15 m,   NS 15 m  S 23 m,    NS 23 m 

18. INDUSTRIAL, GROUP A 

 

 

 

i. High Hazard content 

S 0 m,      NS 0 m 

S 0 m,      NS 0 m 

S 23 m,   NS 0 m 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 294 of 1348 

 

Table 3.16.: Commonpath, Dead end and Travel Distances 

OCCUPANCY 

COMMONPATH  DEAD END 

TRAVEL       
DISTANCE  

19. INDUSTRIAL, GROUP B,C. 

 

 

 

i. General, Low Hazard 

S 30 m,   NS 15 m 

S 15 m,   NS 15 m  S 75 m,   NS 61 m 

ii. Special Purpose 

S 30 m,   NS 15 m 

S 15 m,   NS 15 m  S 122 m,   NS 91 m 

iii. Aircraft Servicing, ground floor 

S 30 m,   NS 15 m 

S 15 m,   NS 15 m  S 30 m,    NS 23 m 

iv. Aircraft Servicing, Mezzanine floor 

S 23 m,   NS 15 m 

S 15 m,   NS 15 m  S 23 m,    NS 23 m 

v. Mechanical Equipment room,  

S 30 m,   NS 15 m 

S 15 m,   NS 15 m  S 75 m,    NS 61 m 

vi. Boiler, Furnace room 

S 30 m,   NS 15 m 

S 15 m,   NS 15 m  S 75 m,    NS 61 m 

20. PARKING, GROUP A,C 

 

 

 

i. Enclosed parking 

ii. Open parking 

S 15 m,   NS 15 m 

S 15 m,   NS 15 m  S 61 m,   NS 46 m 

S 15 m,   NS 15 m 

S 15 m,   NS 15 m  S 122 m,   NS 91 m 

21. PARKING, GROUP C 

 

 

 

i. Mechanical/Robotic parking 

S 15 m,   NS 15 m 

S 15 m,   NS 15 m  S 60 m,   NS 46 m 

22. ANIMAL HOUSING, GROUP A,B,C. 

 

 

 

S 30 m,   NS 23 m 

S 15 m,  NS 6.1 m  S 91 m,   NS 61 m 

 
4.5.5.  Measurement of Commonpath, Dead ends and Travel Distance 

4.5.5.1.  The commonpath, dead ends and travel distance to an exit shall be measured 

on the floor or other walking surface as follows:  

a.  Along the centerline of the natural path of travel, starting from the most 

remote point subject to occupancy.  

b.  Curving around any corners or obstructions, with a 305-mm clearance 

there from, terminating at center of the doorway or other point at which 
the exit begins. 

c.  Where open stairways or ramps are permitted as a path of travel, the dis-
tance shall include the travel on the stairway or ramp and the travel from 
the end of the stairway or ramp to an outside door or other exit in addi-
tion to the distance travelled to reach the stairway or ramp. 

d.  Where measurement includes stairs, the measurement shall be taken in 

the plane of the tread nosing.  

 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 295 of 1348 

5.   Occupancy Specific Requirements  

 

5.1. 
 

Assembly, Group A, B, C. 

5.1.1.  The assembly occupancies shall comply with Table 3.17. along with all other sections of 

this chapter. Where conflicts arise between this section and other sections of the 
Chapter or code, the requirements of this section shall prevail. 

Table 3.17.: Assembly, Group A, B, C. 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  MAIN         
ENTRANCE  
AND EXIT 

i.  Every assembly occupancy shall be provided with a main entrance/exit. 
ii.  The main entrance/exit shall be at the level of exit discharge or shall connect to a 

stairway or ramp leading to a street. 

iii. Each level of the assembly occupancy shall have access to the main entrance/exit. 
iv. The main entrance/exit shall be of a width that accommodates two-thirds (2/3) of 

the total occupant load in the following assembly occupancies.                                       
a. Dance halls                                                                                                                             
b. Discotheques                                                                                                                          
c. Nightclubs                                                                                                                                
d. Assembly occupancies with festival seating. 

v.  In assembly occupancies, other than those listed above, the main entrance/exit 
shall be of a width that accommodates one-half (1/2) of the total occupant load. 
vi. Where the main entrance/exit from an assembly occupancy is through a lobby or 

foyer, the aggregate capacity of all exits from the lobby or foyer shall be permitted 
to provide the required capacity of the main entrance/exit, regardless of whether 
all such exits serve as entrances to the building. 

vii.In assembly occupancies where there is no well defined main entrance/exit, exits 

shall be permitted to be distributed around the perimeter of the building, provided 
that the total exit width furnishes not less than 100 percent of the width needed to 
accommodate the permitted occupant load. 

2.  SINGLE EXIT     

i.  Balconies or mezzanines having an occupant load not exceeding 50 shall be per-

PERMISSION 

mitted to be served by a single means of egress, and such means of egress shall be 
permitted to lead to the floor below. 

ii.  Balconies or mezzanines having an occupant load exceeding 50 - but not exceeding 
100, shall have not less than two remote means of egress, but both such means of 
egress shall be permitted to lead to the floor below. 

iii. A second means of egress shall not be required from lighting and access catwalks, 
galleries, and gridirons above stage where a means of escape to a floor or a roof is 
provided. Such single exit width shall not be less than 560 mm. 

ACCESS CATWALKS, GRIDIRONS FOR ILLUSTRATION 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 296 of 1348 

Table 3.17.: Assembly, Group A, B, C. 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

3.  THEATER 
TYPE        
SEATING  
(THEATER,  
CINEMA,    
AUDITORI-
UM,         
CONCERT 
HALLS) 

i.  Minimum clear width of aisles and other means of egress serving theater type 

seating where aisle riser exceeds 178 mm in height, stair width shall be multiplied 
by factor A, as 7.6 X A. Where A= 1+(Riser height-7)/125. 

ii.  Where stair is not having handrail within 760 mm of horizontal distance, the stair 

width shall be additionally multiplied by factor B, as 7.6 X B. Where B=1.25. 

iii. Where ramps are steeper than 1 in 10 slope, ramp width shall be multiplied by a 

factor C, as 5.6 X C. Where C is 1.10. 

iv. See Smoke protected assembly seating, Table 3.17.20. for reduced egress capaci-

ties. Also see Chapter 10, Section 2.17. for smoke control requirements. 

4.  AISLE          

i.  Aisles Accessways serving seating not at tables and having access to aisle from 

ACCESSWAYS 
SERVING 
SEATING  
NOT AT          
TABLES 

only one side shall comply with Figure 3.22.a. And aisles accessed by both sides of 
the Accessways shall comply with Figure 3.22.b. See Smoke protected assembly 
seating, Table 3.17.20. for reduced restrictions on seating arrangements. 

ii.  Where aisle accessways or aisles converge to form a single path of egress travel, 
the required egress capacity of that path shall be not less than the combined re-
quired capacity of the converging aisle accessways and aisles. 

 

Figure 3.22.a.: Aisle Access from only one side 

Figure 3.22.b.: Aisle Access from only one side 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 297 of 1348 

Table 3.17.: Assembly, Group A, B, C. 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

5.  AISLE SERVING 

i.  Minimum aisle width serving seating on both sides shall not be less than  1200 

SEATING  NOT AT           
TABLE. 

mm. 

ii.  Minimum aisle width serving seating on only one side shall not be less than         

915 mm. 

iii. Minimum aisle width serving not more than 50 people shall not be less than 

915 mm. 

iv. Minimum 585 mm between seating and handrail, when aisle or ramp is subdi-

vided by a handrail. 

6.  AISLE DEAD END 

i.  Maximum dead end in an aisle is 6.1 m. in length. 

7.  AISLE RAMP 

i.  Aisles having slope 1 in 20 to 1 in 8 shall consist of a ramp. 

8.  AISLE STAIR 

i.  Aisles steeper than 1 in 8 slope shall consist of a Stair. 
ii.  The tread depth shall not be  less than 280 mm. Treads shall be uniform in 

9.  AISLE LANDING 

depth and extend to full width of aisle. 

iii. Aisle riser shall not be less than 100 mm and shall not exceed 205 mm in 

height. Riser height shall be uniform throughout the aisle stair. 

i.  Where the path of travel on a stair, an aisle stair, or aisle ramp continues to 
another stair of different rise or tread depth, another aisle stair of different 
rise or tread depth, or another aisle ramp of different slope, there shall be a 
landing whose depth is equal to or greater than the width of the aisle stair or 
ramp. 

ii.  No landing is required between aisle ramps of different slopes. 
iii. No landing shall be required between an aisle ramp and an aisle Accessway or 

between an aisle stair and an aisle Accessway. 

10.  AISLE               

i.  Ramped aisles having a gradient exceeding 1 in 20 and aisle stairs shall be pro-

HANDRAIL 

vided with handrails at one side or along the centerline. 

ii.  Where seating exists on both sides of the aisle, the handrails shall be noncon-
tinuous with gaps or breaks of 560 mm - 915 mm in width, at intervals not ex-
ceeding five rows to facilitate access to seating and to allow crossing from one 
side of the aisle to the other. 

 

Figure 3.22.c.: Aisle Serving both sides 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 298 of 1348 

Table 3.17.: Assembly, Group A, B, C. 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

11.  AISLE ACCESS-

WAYS             
SERVING           
SEATING  AT 
TABLES 

i.  Aisles Accessways serving seating at tables shall comply with Figure 3.22.d.  
ii.  The path of travel along the aisle accessway shall not exceed 11 m from any 

seat to the closest aisle or egress doorway. 

12.  AISLE SERVING  

SEATING  AT 
TABLES 

i.  Aisles serving seating at tables shall comply with Figure 3.22.d.  
ii.  Minimum width of an aisle serving more than 50 people shall not be less than 

1120 mm and serving less than 50 people shall not be less than 915 mm. 

 

Figure 3.22.d.: Aisle and Aisle Accessway serving Tables 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 299 of 1348 

Table 3.17.: Assembly, Group A, B, C. 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

13.  STAGES,    

i.  Stage and platform is permitted to be of any type of construction, unless the 

PROSCENIUM 
AND              
ACCESSORY 
SPACES 

space beneath permanent platform and stage is used for storage or any other 
purpose other than equipment wiring or plumbing, where such floor construc-
tion shall not be less than 1 hour fire resistance rated. 

ii.  Legitimate stages shall be constructed of materials required for Type I buildings, 
except that the area extending from the proscenium opening to the back wall of 
the stage, and for a distance of 1830 mm beyond the proscenium opening on 
each side, shall be permitted to be constructed of steel or heavy timber covered 
with a wood floor not less than 38 mm in actual thickness. 

iii. Legitimate stages shall be completely separated from the seating area by a pro-
scenium wall of not less than 2-hour fire-resistive, noncombustible construction 
with 20 minutes opening protection of listed and approved fire curtain, actuated 
by both manual and automatic detection. 

iv. The proscenium wall shall extend not less than 1220 mm above the roof of the 

auditorium in combustible construction. 

v.  Workshops, storerooms, permanent dressing rooms, and other accessory spaces 
greater than 93 m2, contiguous to stages shall be separated from each other and 
other building areas by 1-hour fire resistance–rated construction and protected 
openings. 

14.  PROJECTION 

i.  Every projection room shall be of permanent construction consistent with the 

ROOM 

building construction type. 

ii.  Film or video projectors or spotlights utilizing light sources that produce particu-

late matter or toxic gases, or light sources that produce hazardous radiation, 
without protective shielding shall be located within a projection room separated 
from rest of the building with 1 hour fire resistance rating. 

iii. The room shall have a floor area of not less than 7.4 m2 for a single machine and 

not less than 3.7 m2 for each additional machine, with clear working space of 
760 mm around machines and rear. 

iv. The projection room and the rooms appurtenant to it shall have a ceiling height 

of not less than 2285 mm. 

v.  Each projection room for safety film shall have not less than one out-swinging, 

self-closing door not less than 760 mm wide and 2030 mm high. 

vi. The aggregate of ports and openings for projection equipment shall not exceed 
25 percent of the area of the wall between the projection room and the auditori-
um, and though no opening protection is required, all openings shall be provided 
with glass or other approved material so as to completely close the opening. 

vii.Each projection room shall be permitted to store films and a maximum of 4 flam-
mable liquid containers of non-breakable type with a maximum capacity of 0.5L 
per container. 

 

PROSCENIUM FOR ILLUSTRATION 

PROJECTION ROOM FOR ILLUSTRATION 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 300 of 1348 

Table 3.17.: Assembly, Group A, B, C. 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

14.  GRAND-
STANDS 

i.  Grandstand shall comply with Figure 3.22.e. 
ii.  Where the front footrest of any grandstand is more than 610 mm above the floor, 

15.  WOODEN 

GRAND-
STANDS 

railings or guards not less than 825 mm above such footrests shall be provided. 
iii. Cross aisles located within the seating area shall be provided with rails not less 

than 660 mm high along the front edge of the cross aisle, where the next seat has 
no backs or the back is less than 610 mm above cross aisle. 

i.  Wooden grandstands shall be erected 3 m away from any buildings. 
ii.  Maximum floor area of a wooden grandstand shall not exceed 900 m2 . 
iii. Maximum length of a wooden grandstand shall not exceed 61 m. 
iv. Where groups of wooden grandstands are erected, maximum 3 grandstands of 
individual grandstand area of maximum 900 m2 with separation distance of 6 m 
between each other are allowed. 

v.  Where more of such group of grandstands are required, each group shall not be 

less than 15 m apart. 

vi. Where these area separations are not possible, 1 hour fire resistance rated walls 

shall be erected between grandstands.  

vii. Where the grandstand is constructed entirely of labeled fire resistance rated 

wood that has passed the standard rain test ASTM D 2898, all the area re-
strictions shall be allowed to be doubled subject to Civil Defence approval. 

16.  OPENING 

GAPS 

i.  Any opening gaps between seats, between seats and foot rests, between seats 
and aisle or between aisles and cross aisles shall not be greater than 100 mm in 
dimension. 

GRANDSTAND FOR ILLUSTRATION 

BLEACHERS FOR ILLUSTRATION 

FOLDING/ TELESCOPIC EATING  

 

Figure 3.22.e.: Indoor Grandstand 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 301 of 1348 

Table 3.17.: Assembly, Group A, B, C. 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

17.  WALKING   

i.  Flooring for the surface of steps and ramps forming the aisles or gangways 

SURFACE 

shall be finished using non-slip materials. 

ii.  Illumination of steps shall be such that each step is clearly visible when the 
general lighting is switched off. Where the emergency lighting of the hall or 
auditorium is able to provide sufficient lighting to the steps, separate emer-
gency power supply to illuminate the steps would not be required. 

iii. For changes of level, steps shall not be used to overcome differences in level in 

aisles or aisle accessway unless the slope exceeds 1 in 8. 

18.  WAITING           
SPACES IN          
ASSEMBLY 

i.  In theaters and other assembly occupancies where seats are not available, per-
sons are allowed to wait in a lobby or similar space until seats or space is avail-
able. 

ii.  Such use of a lobby or similar space shall not encroach upon the required clear 

width of exits. 

iii. Exits for waiting spaces shall be in addition to the exits specified for the main 

auditorium area and shall conform in construction and arrangement to the 
general rules for exits given in this chapter.  

19. TWO EXIT 

i.  Rooms exceeding 280 m2 in area requires 2 exit doors from that room, re-

DOORS                
REQUIREMENT 

motely located as per Section 4.4. 

20. EXITS FROM 

i.  Assembly occupancies having open podiums for assembly purposes, shall en-

OPEN PODIUM 

sure 2 exits remotely located as per Section 4.4. 

ii.  Such required 2 exits shall be any of the following. 
a.  Exits leading back into building, to the building exit stairs. 
b.  Enclosed exit stairs to exterior discharge from the podium.  
c.  Open or outside exterior stairs as per Table 3.4., 14., discharging directly out-

side to publicway.  

d.  Combinations of above options a, b, and c. 

 

Points to Ponder 

 
Some of the worst fires have been the fires in Assembly Occupancies. Theater, Cinema, Night 
Clubs have been on fires with heavy casualties. Worst stampedes have taken toll in Assembly 
spaces such as sports arenas and night clubs. 
 
Kiss night club fire in Santa Maria, Brazil started in the early morning hours of 27 January 
2013. A fire broke out while students were holding a fresher’s ball. A stampede occurred fol-
lowing the fire, and a lack of exit signs and emergency exits allegedly contributed to the 
deaths. 
 

242 were killed and 630 were injured. Most of the victims were between 18 and 30 years old. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 302 of 1348 

Table 3.17.: Assembly, Group A, B, C. 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

21. SMOKE    

i.  Assembly Seating in a smoke protected area shall have the benefit of reduced 

PROTECTED 
ASSEMBLY 
SEATING 

egress capacity, reduced restrictions of seating arrangement, provided Life Safety 
Evaluation is submitted to Civil Defence for approval. 

ii.  All means of egress serving a smoke-protected assembly seating area shall be pro-
vided with smoke control system as per Chapter 10, Section 2.13. to achieve the 
level of smoke at not less than 1830 mm above the floor of the means of egress. 
iii. For smoke protected Assembly Seating, minimum clear widths of aisles, aisle Ac-
cessways, aisle stairs, aisle ramps shall be as per Table 3.18.a. and Table 3.18.b. 
iv. Smoke-protected assembly seating shall be permitted to have a common path of 
travel of 15 m from any seat to a point where a person has a choice of two direc-
tions of egress travel. 

v.  In smoke-protected assembly seating, the dead ends in aisle stairs shall not ex-

ceed a distance of 21 rows, unless the seats served by the dead-end aisle are not 
more than 40 seats from another aisle. 

vi. In smoke-protected assembly seating, Travel distance from any seat to nearest 

entrance to concourse shall not exceed 122m. 

vii.  The travel distance from the entrance to the vomitory portal or from the egress 

concourse to an approved egress stair, ramp, or walk at the building exterior 
shall not exceed 61 m.  

 

Table 3.18.a.: Smoke Protected Assembly Seating based on Total seats 

ITEMS 

TOTAL SEATS   
PRESENT 

FOR AISLE AT 
ONLY ONE END 

FOR AISLE AT 
BOTH ENDS 

1.  WITH 305 MM 

OF CLEAR 
WIDTH OF 
AISLE             
ACCESSWAY 

i. 
<4000 
ii. 
4000 - 6999 
iii.  7000– 9999 
iv.  10,000– 12,999 
v. 
13,000– 15,999 
vi.  16,000– 18,999 
vii.  19,000– 21,999 
viii.   >22,000 

7 Seats per row 
7 Seats per row 
8 Seats per row 
8 Seats per row 
9 Seats per row 
9 Seats per row 
10 Seats per row 
11 Seats per row 

14 Seats per row 
15 Seats per row 
16 Seats per row 
17 Seats per row 
18 Seats per row 
19 Seats per row 
20 Seats per row 
21 Seats per row 

Table 3.18.b.: Smoke Protected Assembly Seating based on aisle Accessway width 

ITEMS 

AISLE ACCESSWAY 
WIDTH 

FOR AISLE AT 
ONLY ONE END 

FOR AISLE AT 
BOTH ENDS 

1.    FOR INCREASED 
AISLE                     
ACCESSWAY 
WIDTH 

300 mm– 324 mm 
i. 
ii. 
325 mm– 349 mm 
iii.  350 mm– 374 mm 
iv.  375 mm– 399 mm 
v. 
400 mm– 424 mm 
vi.  425 mm– 449 mm 
vii.  450 mm– 474 mm 
viii.  475 mm– 499 mm 
ix.  500 mm and more 

7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
12 
12 
12 

 

14 
16 
18 
20 
22 
24 
26 
28 
as per Travel    Dis-
tance limitation 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 303 of 1348 

5.2.  Business, Group A, B, C. 
 

5.2.1.  The Business occupancies shall comply with Table 3.19. along with all other sections of 

this chapter. Where conflicts arise between this section and other sections of the 
Chapter or code, the requirements of this section shall prevail. 

Table 3.19.: Business, Group A, B, C. 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.   SINGLE EXIT 

i.  A single exit door shall be permitted for a room or area with a total occupant load 

DOOR        
PERMISSION 

of less than 100 persons, provided the exit discharges directly to outside at level 
of exit discharge and such travel to outside is not more than 30 m. 

ii.  If stair is involved, it shall be either enclosed interior stair or outside stair with to-

tal travel distance to outside, including travel distance within the stair, shall not 
exceed 30 m. 

iii. A single outside stair shall be permitted to serve multiple stories, provided such 

stairs are not more than 4570 mm in height from the fire access level. 

iv. Rooms exceeding 280 m2 in area requires 2 exit doors from that room, remotely 

located as per Section 4.4. 

2.  SINGLE EXIT 
STAIR             
PERMISSION 

i.  A single exit Stair, separate to each storey shall be permitted for Lowrise building 
with a total occupant load of less than 30 persons per floor, provided the exit stair 
discharges directly to outside at level of exit discharge and such travel to outside 
is not more than 30 m. 

ii.  Such a stair, if interior, shall be fully enclosed and shall not serve any other sto-

ries. 

iii. Such a stair, if exterior and it is an outside stair, shall be permitted to serve all sto-

ries. 

iv. A single means of egress shall be permitted from a mezzanine within a business 
occupancy, provided that the common path of travel does not exceed                    
(S 30 m, NS 23 m) 

v.  A single open Stair shall be permitted for a 2 storey, Single tenant,  fully sprin-

klered building, provided that full travel distance to outside including the travel 
distance within stair does not exceed 30 m. 

Figure 3.23.: Single Exit Permission in Business Occupancy 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 304 of 1348 

5.3.  Educational, Group A, B, C. 
 

5.3.1.  Educational, Group A (Nurseries, Kindergarten, Preschool, Talent Centers for Kids) 
 

5.3.1.1. The Educational Group A occupancies shall comply with Table 3.20. along with 

all other sections of this chapter. Where conflicts arise between this section 
and other sections of this Chapter or code, the requirements of this section 
shall prevail. 

Table 3.20.: Educational, Group A (Nurseries, Kindergarten, Preschool, Talent Centers) 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.   CLASS ROOMS 

i.  Rooms normally occupied by preschool, kindergarten, or first-grade students 

(Generally, children below 6 years of age) shall be located on a level of exit dis-
charge, leading to outside. 

ii.  Rooms normally occupied by second-grade students (Generally, children be-

tween 6 - 8 years of age) shall not be located more than one storey above a lev-
el of exit discharge, leading to outside. 

iii. Where children up to 6 years of age are situated in rooms located above level 
of discharge and children between 6 - 8 years of age are situated in rooms at 
second storey above level of discharge, shall be provided with dedicated means 
of egress directly to outside, independent of the building means of egress or 
the users. 

iv. Aisles shall be not less than 760 mm wide. 

2.  CORRIDOR 

i.  Corridors shall not be less than 1830 mm in width.  
ii.  Enclosed Corridor walls shall be smoke partitions, separating other parts of the 

school. 

iii. Corridor shall be 1 hour fire rated if building is not sprinklered.  

3.  EXIT DOORS 

i.  Any door in a required means of egress from an area having an occupant load 
of 100 or more persons shall be permitted to be provided with a latch or lock 
only if the latch or lock is panic hardware or fire exit hardware.  

ii.  Access controlled doors are permitted. 

4.  SINGLE EXIT 
STAIR             
PERMISSION 

i.  Single Exit Stair is not permitted. 
ii.  Minimum of 2 exits stair shall be provided, such that they shall be accessible 

from every part of every storey and mezzanine, complying to the distance per-
mitted as common path of travel. 

5. TWO EXIT 

DOORS         RE-
QUIREMENT 

i.  Every room or space larger than 93 m2 shall have 2 separate exit access doors, 
remote from each other as per Section 4.4, leading to corridor, which has two 
exit stairs in opposite directions. 

6.  RESCUE            

i.  Every room or space greater than 23 m2  used for classroom or other education-

WINDOW IN 
NON          
SPRINKLERED 
BUILDINGS 

al purposes or normally subject to student occupancy in a non-sprinklered 
building shall have at least one window with a fixed breakable glass, having an 
area not less than 510 mm in width and 610 mm in height, located not more 
than 1120 mm above the floor for emergency rescue. 

ii.  Such window shall be on the exterior wall of the room, accessible from public 

way  to the Civil Defence rescue team. 

7.  OTHER SAFETY 
PRECAUTIONS 

 

i.  Clothing and personal effects shall not be stored in corridors unless building is 

sprinklered. 

ii.  Artwork, craftwork and teaching materials shall not exceed 20% in non sprin-

klered building and 50% in sprinklered building, of the wall area. 

iii. Open flame cooking, cooking gas storage, open flame activity, fire works are not 

allowed. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 305 of 1348 

Table 3.20.: Educational, Group A (Nurseries, Kindergarten, Preschool, Talent Centers) 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

8. DOORS 

i.  Every closet, locker door latch shall be such that children can open the door 

from inside the closet. 

ii.  Every bathroom door shall be designed to allow opening from the outside dur-

ing an emergency when locked. 

iii.  At all times, the Group A educational occupancy is occupied, all locking devices 

that impede or prohibit egress or that cannot be easily disengaged shall be 
prohibited. 

i.  Existing occupancies, specially 2 storey Private Villas changing their usage to 

Educational, Group A occupancy shall comply with all the requirements of Table 
3.20. except requirements for corridor width. 

9.   EXISTING           
OCCUPANCIES 
CHANGING TO 
EDUCATION-
AL, GROUP A              
OCCUPANCY. 

ii.  Where single exit stair exists, the required two exit stair shall be achieved by 

providing additional outside open stair, either masonry or steel, directly to the 
outside at discharge level of the ground floor. 

iii. Class rooms shall not be located on upper floors. 
iv. Upper floors shall be occupied for offices, Staff room, storage, health checkup 

etc. 

 

Did You Know? 

13 children, four nursery em-

ployees and two firefighters 

died from suffocation after they 

were trapped in the Gympanzee 

nursery while smoke from an 

electrical fire at a nearby shop 

in Qatar’s  Villaggio shopping 
complex spread. 

A Qatari court sentenced four 

defendants in this case to six 

years in prison. 

Figure 3.24.: Nursery and Preschool Class room and Exit arrangements 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 306 of 1348 

5.3.2.  Educational, Group B, C. (Schools and Colleges) 
 

5.3.2.1. The Educational Group B, C occupancies shall comply with Table 3.21. along 
with all other sections of this chapter. Where conflicts arise between this sec-
tion and other sections of this Chapter or code, the requirements of this sec-
tion shall prevail. 

Table 3.21.: Educational, Group B, C. (Schools and Colleges) 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.   CLASS 

ROOMS 

i.  Every room that is normally subject to student occupancy shall have an exit access 

door leading directly to an enclosed exit access corridor, open exit access corridor or 
exit door to outside or exit stair. 

ii.  One room shall be permitted to intervene between a normally occupied student 

room and an exit access corridor, provided the travel from a room served by an in-
tervening room to the corridor door or exit shall not exceed (S 30 m, NS 23 m). 

iii. Aisles shall be not less than 760 mm wide. 

2.  CORRIDOR 

i.  Corridors shall not be less than 1830 mm in width where classrooms are situated on 

only one side of the corridor. 

ii.  Corridors shall not be less than 3000 mm in width where classrooms are situated on 

both sides of the corridor. 

iii. Corridors shall be looped unless exit stairs are located at both extreme ends of the 

exit corridor. 

iv. Enclosed Corridor walls shall be smoke partitions, separating other parts of the 

school, if the building is sprinkler protected throughout. Otherwise the corridor shall 
have 1-hour fire resistance rating. 

3.  EXIT 

DOORS 

i.  Any door in a required means of egress from an area having an occupant load of 100 

or more persons shall be permitted to be provided with a latch or lock only if the 
latch or lock is panic hardware or fire exit hardware . 

ii.  Access controlled doors are permitted. 
iii. Doors that swing into an exit access corridor shall be arranged to prevent interfer-

ence with corridor travel. 

i.  Every room or space larger than 93 m2 shall have 2 separate exit access doors, re-
mote from each other as per Section 4.4, leading to corridor, which has two exit 
stairs in opposite directions. 

4. TWO EXIT 

DOORS         
REQUIRE-
MENTS 

5.  SINGLE 

EXIT STAIR          
PERMIS-
SION 

i.  Single Exit Stair is not permitted. 
ii.  Minimum of 2 exits stair shall be provided, such that they shall be accessible from 
every part of every storey and mezzanine, complying to the distance permitted as 
common path of travel. 

6. OPEN STAIR  i.  Open stairs in educational occupancies are allowed but not considered as exit stairs. 

Where open stairs are provided, they shall be separated  from exit corridors with 
glazing or smoke proof enclosures as per Section 3.5., as required for similar vertical 
openings, with the exception of an open and unobstructed communicating space 
connecting three floors or less, an atrium, or a convenience opening.  

i.  Every room or space greater than 23 m2  m2  used for classroom or other educational 

purposes or normally subject to student occupancy in a non-sprinklered building 
shall have at least one window with a fixed breakable glass, having an area not less 
than 510 mm in width and 610 mm in height, located not more than 1120 mm above 
the floor for emergency rescue. 

ii.  Such window shall be on the exterior wall of the room, accessible from public way  

to the Civil Defence rescue team. 

7.  RESCUE    
WINDOW 
IN NON          
SPRIN-
KLERED 
BUILDINGS 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 307 of 1348 

Table 3.21.: Educational, Group B, C. (Schools and Colleges) 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

8.  LABORA-

TORY 

9.  OTHER       
SAFETY     
PRECAU-
TIONS 

10. EXITS 
FROM 
OPEN  
PODIUM 

i.  Laboratory using flammable material shall be separated from the rest of the area 

with 1 hour fire resistance rated wall. 

ii.  Flammable gas used for laboratory shall be designed and installed in accordance 

with Chapter 11. Liquid Petroleum Gas. 

i.  Clothing and personal effects shall not be stored in corridors unless building is sprin-

klered. 

ii.  Artwork, craftwork and teaching materials shall not exceed 20% in non sprinklered 

building and 50% in sprinklered building, of the wall area. 

i.  Educational occupancies having open podiums for assembly purposes, shall ensure 2 

exits remotely located as per Section 4.4. 

ii.  Such required 2 exits shall be any of the following. 
a.  Exits leading back into building, to the building exit stairs. 
b.  Enclosed exit stairs to exterior discharge from the podium.  
c.  Open or outside exterior stairs as per Table 3.4., 14., discharging directly outside to 

publicway.  

d.  Combinations of above options a, b, and c. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 308 of 1348 

5.4.  Healthcare, Group A, B, C. 
 

5.4.1.  Healthcare, Group A, B. (Hospitals and Clinics) 
 

5.4.1.1. The Healthcare Group A, B occupancies shall comply with Table 3.22. along 

with all other sections of this chapter. Where conflicts arise between this sec-
tion and other sections of this Chapter or code, the requirements of this sec-
tion shall prevail. 

 
5.4.1.2. The Healthcare Group A, B occupancies shall be designed, constructed, main-
tained, and operated to minimize the possibility of a fire emergency requiring 
the evacuation of occupants.  

 
5.4.1.3. Extensions, expansions of existing healthcare occupancies shall be separated 

from any existing structure not conforming to the provisions of this chapter by 
a fire barrier having not less than a 2-hour fire resistance rating. 

Table 3.22.: Healthcare, Group A, B. (Hospitals and Clinics) 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  CORRIDOR 

i.  Aisles, corridors and ramps required for exit access in a inpatient areas of hospital 
or nursing home shall be not less than 2440 mm in clear and unobstructed width. 
See Figure 3.25.a. and 3.25.b. for obstructions permitted in such corridors. 

ii.  Aisles, corridors and ramps required for exit access in a non inpatient areas, psychi-
atric care, limited care areas shall not be less than 1830 mm in clear width. See          
Figure 3.25.c. for obstructions permitted in such corridors. 

iii. Aisles, corridors and ramps serving exit access in outpatient, consultations, pharma-

cy areas shall not be less than 1200 mm in clear width. 

iv. The doors in corridor shall swing 180 degrees and shall project no more than 180 

mm into corridor. 

Figure 3.25.a.: Permitted furniture Obstructions in 2440 mm Corridor 

Figure 3.25.b.: Permitted Obstructions in 2440 mm Corridor 
 

Figure 3.25.c.: Permitted Obstructions in 1830 mm Corridor 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 309 of 1348 

 

Table 3.22.: Healthcare, Group A, B. (Hospitals and Clinics) 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  CORRIDOR 

iv.   Every corridor shall provide access to not less than two approved exits without 

passing through any intervening rooms or spaces other than corridors or lobbies. 
v.  Every habitable room shall have an exit access door leading directly to an exit ac-

cess corridor, except suites and rooms having direct discharge to outside. 

vi.   Patient sleeping rooms with not more than 8 patient beds shall be permitted to 

pass through one intervening room to the exit corridor. 

vii. All corridor walls shall be smoke partitions, extending fully up to ceiling. 

Figure 3.26.: Healthcare occupancy Corridor width Requirements 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 310 of 1348 

Table 3.22.: Healthcare, Group A, B. (Hospitals and Clinics) 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

2.  SPACES 

OPEN TO 
EXIT       
CORRIDOR 

i.  Unlimited spaces and areas shall be permitted to be open to the exit corridor, pro-
vided such spaces and exit corridor are in the same smoke compartment and such 
spaces comply with the following requirements.  

ii.  Unlimited spaces and areas are permitted to be open to Exit corridor, unless they 

are patient sleeping rooms, treatment rooms or hazardous areas.  

iii. Waiting areas having aggregate area not exceeding 56 m2 shall be allowed to be 

open to the exit corridor. 

iv. Gift shops, pharmacies and retail shops not exceeding 46 m2 shall be permitted to be 

open to exit corridor or lobby. 

v.  Nurse Stations shall be permitted to be open to exit corridor. 
vi. Cooking and kitchens are not allowed to be open to exit corridor. 
vii. Louvered door openings of Hazardous content rooms, Medical gas storage rooms 

etc. shall not open into exit corridors. 

viii.However, arrangement of the permitted open spaces shall not obstruct the mini-
mum width required for exit corridor. Exit shall be clearly marked and visible and 
shall not be confusing with permitted open spaces. 

 

Figure 3.27.: Permitted Open Spaces in the exit Corridor 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 311 of 1348 

Table 3.22.: Healthcare, Group A, B. (Hospitals and Clinics) 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

3.  EXIT DOOR 

i.  Doors in the exit corridor shall not be required to be fire rated but shall be with 

SPECIFICATION 

self closing devices to resist the passage of smoke, with not more than 25 mm 
gap between floor covering and the bottom of the door. In case of doors pro-
tecting pass-through openings a clearance between the bottom of the door and 
the sill shall not exceed 3 mm.  

ii.  Locks shall not be installed on patient sleeping rooms. Restricting entry into 

patient rooms from corridor by access control operated by staff is allowed. Any 
arrangement shall not prevent patients from egress through such doors. 

iii.  Door-locking arrangements shall be permitted where the clinical needs of pa-

tients require specialized security measures, safety, protective measures or 
where patients pose a security threat, provided that staff can readily unlock 
doors at all times. 

iv.  Any door in an exit passageway, stairway enclosure, horizontal exit, smoke bar-
rier, or hazardous area enclosure (except boiler rooms, heater rooms, and me-
chanical equipment rooms) shall be permitted to be held open only by an auto-
matic release device. The automatic sprinkler system and the fire alarm system, 
and the manual activation shall be arranged to initiate the closing action of all 
such doors, at all levels automatically throughout the smoke compartment or 
throughout the entire facility. 

v.  Horizontal sliding doors that are not automatic closing shall be limited to a sin-
gle leaf and shall have a latch or other mechanism that ensures that the doors 
will not rebound into a partially open position if forcefully closed. 

vi.  Horizontal-sliding doors serving an occupant load of fewer than 10 shall be per-
mitted, provided that the area served by the door has no high hazard contents, 
the door is readily operable from either side without special knowledge or 
effort, the force required to operate the door complies, the door assembly 
complies with any required fire protection rating and, where rated, is self-
closing or automatic closing by means of smoke detection. Where corridor 
doors are required to latch, the doors are equipped with a latch or other mech-
anism that ensures that the doors will not rebound into a partially open posi-
tion if forcefully closed.  

vii.  A single door in horizontal exit shall be permitted, provided exit serves one di-

rection egress only and has a width not less than 1055 mm in clear width. 

viii. A horizontal exit involving a corridor 2440 mm or more in width and serving as 
a means of egress from both sides of the doorway shall have a pair of swinging 
doors arranged to swing in opposite directions from each other, with each door 
having a clear width of not less than 1055 mm, or by a special-purpose horizon-
tally sliding accordion or folding door assembly. 

ix.  A horizontal exit involving a corridor 1830 mm or more in width and serving as 
a means of egress from both sides of the doorway shall have a pair of swinging 
doors arranged to swing in opposite directions from each other, with each door 
having a clear width of not less than 810 mm, or by a special-purpose horizon-
tally sliding accordion or folding door assembly. 

x.  Doors in Smoke barriers shall be substantial doors such as nonrated 44 mm 

thick solid-bonded wood-core doors, or shall be of construction that resists fire 
for a minimum of 20 minutes.  

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 312 of 1348 

 

Table 3.22.: Healthcare, Group A, B. (Hospitals and Clinics) 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

4.  SINGLE EXIT    
PERMISSION 

i.  Single Exit is not permitted. 
ii.  Not less than two separate exits shall be accessible from every part of every    

storey. 

iii.  Not less than two exits shall be accessible from each smoke compartment, 

and egress shall be permitted through an adjacent compartment(s), provided 
that the two required egress paths are arranged so that both do not pass 
through the same adjacent smoke compartment of fire origin. 

iv.  Every corridor shall provide access to not less than two approved exits with-
out passing through any intervening rooms or spaces other than corridors or 
lobbies. 

5.  TWO EXIT DOORS         

i.  Sleeping rooms of more than 93 m2 shall have not less than two exit access 

REQUIREMENTS 

doors remotely located from each other. 

6.  SUITES FOR     
PATIENT CARE 

ii.  Non-sleeping rooms of more than 230 m2 shall have not less than two exit 

access doors remotely located from each other. 

iii.  Sleeping suites of more than 93 m2 shall have not less than two exit access 

doors remotely located from each other. 

iv.  Suites with area more than 230 m2 having non-sleeping risk shall have two 

exit access doors remotely located from each other. 

i.  Suites shall be separated from other suites and other areas of the healthcare 

occupancies with a smoke barrier extending from floor to ceiling. 

ii.  Suites for patients sleeping shall be provided with constant staff supervision. 
iii.  Suites shall have direct access to exit corridor or horizontal exit. 
iv.  Sleeping suites of more than 93 m2 shall have not less than two exit access 

doors remotely located from each other. 

v.  Suites for patient sleeping shall not have area more than 930 m2. 
vi.  Suites having non-sleeping risk shall not have area more than 1390 m2. 

7.  SMOKE            

i.  Every floor of health care, Group A, B occupancies, having healthcare activity 

COMPARTMENT 

ii. 

shall be divided into minimum of 2 smoke compartments, not exceeding 
2100 m2 in area. The smoke barrier shall be 1 hour fire resistance rated. 
If the area is an atrium separated in accordance with applicable require-
ments, in which case the smoke compartment limitation shall be permitted 
to be unlimited. 

iii.  Windows in smoke barrier shall be fixed fire rated window assemblies. 
iv.  Vision panels in smoke compartment doors shall be of fire rated glazing in 

approved frames and bottom of the vision panel shall not be more than 1090 
mm from finished floor. 

8. EXITS FROM     

i.  Healthcare occupancies having open podiums for assembly purposes, shall 

ensure 2 exits remotely located as per Section 4.4. 
ii.  Such required 2 exits shall be any of the following. 
a.  Exits leading back into building, to the building exit stairs. 
b.  Enclosed exit stairs to exterior discharge from the podium.  
c.  Open or outside exterior stairs as per Table 3.4., 14., discharging directly 

outside to publicway.  

d.  Combinations of above options a, b, and c. 

PODIUM 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 313 of 1348 

Table 3.22.: Healthcare, Group A, B. (Hospitals and Clinics) 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

9.  HAZARDOUS 

i.  Boiler and Heater rooms shall be separated by fire barriers having 1 hour fire re-

AREA           
SEPARATION 

sistance rating. 

ii.  Bulk and central Laundry shall be separated by fire barriers having 1 hour fire re-

sistance rating. 

iii.  Plant maintenance, paint shops shall be separated by fire barriers having 1 hour 

fire resistance rating. 

iv.  Soiled linen rooms with more than 64 gal (242 L) of soiled linen shall be separated 

by  fire barriers having a 1-hour fire resistance rating.  

v.  Garbage rooms shall be separated by fire barriers having 1 hour fire resistance 

rating. 

vi.  storage rooms larger than 9.3 m2 shall be separated by fire barriers having 1 hour 

fire resistance rating. 

vii. Medical gas rooms shall be 1 hour fire rated enclosure with 1 hour fire door. 

10.  MEDICAL 

i.  Only gas cylinders, reusable shipping containers, and their accessories shall be 

GAS 

permitted to be stored in closed rooms containing central supply systems or gas 
cylinders 

ii.  No flammable materials, cylinders containing flammable gases, or containers con-

taining flammable liquids shall be stored in rooms with medical gas cylinders. 

iii.  Cylinders not in use shall have their valve protection caps secured tightly in place. 
iv.  Cylinders containing compressed gases and containers for volatile liquids shall be 

kept away from radiators, steam piping, and sources of heat. 

v.  Gas storage room locations shall be chosen to permit access by delivery vehicles 
and management of cylinders such that proximity to loading docks, access to ele-
vators etc. are taken into consideration.  

vi.  Indoor locations for oxygen, nitrous oxide, and mixtures of these gases shall not 

be exposed to:                                                                                                                              
a. Areas involved in critical patient care                                                                            
b. Anesthetizing locations                                                                                                     
c. Locations storing flammables                                                                                          
d. Rooms containing open electrical contacts or transformers                                     
e. Storage tanks for flammable or combustible liquids                                                    
f. Kitchens                                                                                                                                
g. Engines 

vii.  Medical gas rooms shall be provided with mechanical ventilation to prevent accu-

mulation of gases. 

viii.  Cylinders, whether full or empty, shall not be stored in enclosures containing 

medical air compressor sources and medical vacuum supply systems. 

ix.  Oxygen bulk units and storage shall be 3 m away from parking, public sidewalk, 

doors and windows.  

x.  Oxygen bulk units and storage shall be 15 m away from patient areas and public 

assembly points. 

xi.  Oxygen bulk units and storage shall be 7.6 m away from flammable liquids, gases 

and material tanks. 

xii.  Medical gas Piping shall be in shafts and shall not be installed in kitchens, elevator 

shafts, elevator machine rooms, areas with open flames, electrical service equip-
ment over 600 volts. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 314 of 1348 

5.4.2.  Healthcare, Group C (Ambulatory Healthcare) 
 

5.4.2.1. The Healthcare Group C, the Ambulatory Healthcare occupancies shall comply 
with Table 3.23. along with all other sections of this chapter. Where conflicts 
arise between this section and other sections of this Chapter or code, the re-
quirements of this section shall prevail. 

 
5.4.2.2. The Healthcare Group C, the Ambulatory Healthcare facilities shall be de-

signed, constructed, maintained, and operated to minimize the possibility of a 
fire emergency requiring the evacuation of occupants.  

Table 3.23.: Healthcare, Group C. (Ambulatory Healthcare) 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  CORRIDOR 

i.  Aisles, corridors and ramps required for exit access shall be not less than 1200 

mm in clear and unobstructed width.  

ii.  Where aisles, corridors and ramps required for exit access is 1830 mm in 

width, projections not more than 150 mm from the corridor wall, above the 
handrail height, shall be permitted for the installation of hand-rub dispensing 
units.  

2. SINGLE EXIT 

i.  Single Exit is not permitted. 
ii.  Not less than two separate exits shall be accessible from every part of every  

storey. 

iii.  Not less than two exits shall be accessible from each smoke compartment, 

and egress shall be permitted through an adjacent compartment(s), provided 
that the two required egress paths are arranged so that both do not pass 
through the same adjacent smoke compartment of fire origin. 

3. TWO EXIT DOORS              

i.  Every room or space larger than 232 m2 shall have 2 separate exits, remote 

REQUIREMENT 

from each other as per Section 4.4. 

4. HAZARDOUS   

i.  Boiler and Heater rooms shall be separated by fire barriers having 1 hour fire 

AREAS 

resistance rating. 

ii.  Bulk and central Laundry shall be shall be separated by fire barriers having 1 

hour fire resistance rating. 

iii.  Plant maintenance, paint shops shall be separated by fire barriers having 1 

hour fire resistance rating. 

iv.  Soiled linen or trash  collection receptacles shall not exceed 32 gal (121 L) in 
capacity unless they comply with applicable requirements in international 
codes. 

v.  Garbage rooms shall be separated by fire barriers having 1 hour fire re-

sistance rating. 

vi.  storage rooms larger than 9.3 m2 shall be separated by fire barriers having 1 

hour fire resistance rating. 

vii. Medical gas rooms shall be 1 hour fire rated enclosure with 1 hour fire door. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 315 of 1348 

Table 3.23.: Healthcare, Group C. (Ambulatory Healthcare) 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

5. SEPARATION 

i.  Ambulatory health care occupancies shall be separated from other tenants 

and occupancies with 1 hour fire resistance rated construction and minimum 
of 44 mm thick doors. 

ii.  Doors shall be constructed of not less than 44 mm thick, solid-bonded wood 
core or the equivalent and shall be equipped with positive latches, and shall 
be self-closing and shall be kept in the closed position, except when in use.  

i.  Every floor of health care, Group C, Ambulatory healthcare occupancies, hav-

ing area more than 900 m2 per story shall be divided into minimum of 2 
smoke compartments, not exceeding 2000 m2 in area. The smoke barrier 
shall be 1 hour fire resistance rated. 

ii.  The area of an atrium separated in accordance with applicable requirements 

shall be permitted to be unlimited. 

iii.  Windows in smoke barrier shall be fixed fire rated window assemblies. 
iv.  Vision panels in smoke compartment doors shall be of fire-rated glazing in 
approved frames. The glazing and bottom of the vision panel shall not be 
more than 1090 mm from the finished floor. 

6.  SMOKE                 
COMPARTMENT 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 316 of 1348 

5.5.  Residential, Group A, B, C. 
 

5.5.1.  Residential, Group A. (Apartments, Flats, Residential Units) 
 

5.5.1.1. The Residential Group A, (Apartments, Flats and Residential Units) occupancies 

shall comply with Table 3.24. along with all other sections of this chapter. 
Where conflicts arise between this section and other sections of this Chapter 
or code, the requirements of this section shall prevail. 

Table 3.24.: Residential, Group A. (Apartments, Flats, Residential Units) 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  MULTIPLE  

i.  No dwelling unit of an apartment building shall have its sole means of egress 

OCCUPANCY 

pass through any nonresidential occupancy of the same building, unless building 
is sprinklered and egress is not through hazardous content locations. 

ii.  No dwelling unit of an apartment building shall have its sole means of egress 
pass through any nonresidential occupancy of the same building, unless such 
egress is separated from non-residential occupancies by 1 hour fire resistance 
rated corridor and egress is not through hazardous content locations. 

iii.  No dwelling unit of an apartment building shall have its sole means of egress 

pass through any nonresidential occupancy of the same building, unless non resi-
dential occupancy is fully sprinklered as per chapter 9. 

2.  SINGLE EXIT 
STAIR           
PERMISSION 

1.  APPLICABLE  TO  NEW LOWRISE RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS 
 
i.  Single exit stair OR scissor stair shall be permitted, if all the following conditions 

 
 

are met.                                                                                                                                    
a. Building has maximum height of 15 m (Lowrise building).                                         
b. Typical floor area of the building does not exceed 500 m2.                                       
c. Maximum number of dwelling units in a floor does not exceed 6.                           
d. Travel distance from dwelling unit door to exit stair does not exceed 10.7 m.      
e. Exit stair is 2 hour fire rated enclosure, has minimum width of 1200 mm and 
discharges directly to outside at the discharge level.                                                           
f. The exit corridor accessing the single exit stair is 1 hour fire rated.   

 
ii.    Single exit stair shall be permitted, if all the following conditions are met.                
a. Single exit stair is an outside stair, enclosed or open.                                                 
b. Building has maximum height of 15 m (Lowrise building).                                                                                            
b. Maximum number of dwelling units in a floor does not exceed 2.                                                                        
c. Travel distance from dwelling unit door to exit stair does not exceed 10.7 m.  

 
iii.   Single exit stair shall be permitted, provided all the following conditions are met.  

a. Building has maximum height of 15 m (Lowrise building).                                             
b. Dwelling unit has direct access to the interior exit stair and the exit stair serves 
only that dwelling unit.                                                                                                          
c. Exit stair is 2 hour fire rated enclosure, has minimum width of 1200 mm. 

3.  CORRIDOR 

i.  Corridor shall be minimum of 1200 mm in width. 
ii.  Corridor shall be separated from other areas of the building by 1 hour fire re-

sistance rated construction. 

iii.  Grilles and louvers shall be prohibited in walls or doors of exit access corridors. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 317 of 1348 

 

 

Figure 3.29.: Single Exit Stair Permission in Residential Apartments 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 318 of 1348 

Table 3.24.: Residential, Group A. (Apartments, Flats, Residential Units) 

 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

4.  SEPARATION 

i.  Dwelling units shall be separated from each other by walls and floors constructed 

as fire barriers having a minimum of 1 hour fire resistance rating. 

5.  HAZARDOUS 

i.  Boiler and Heater rooms shall be separated by fire barriers having 1 hour fire re-

AREA         
SEPARATION 

sistance rating and sprinklers shall be provided. 

ii.  Bulk and central Laundry shall be shall be separated by fire barriers having 1 hour 

fire resistance rating. and sprinklers shall be provided. 

iii.  Plant maintenance, paint shops shall be separated by fire barriers having 1 hour 

fire resistance rating and sprinklers shall be provided. 

iv.  Soiled linen rooms shall have 1 hour fire resistance rating and shall be sprin-

klered. 

v.  Garbage rooms shall be separated by fire barriers having 1 hour fire resistance 

rating and sprinklers shall be provided. 

vi.  Garbage chutes shall have 2 hour fire resistance rating. 
vii. storage rooms outside dwelling units shall be separated by fire barriers having 1 

hour fire resistance rating or sprinklers shall be provided. 

viii. On roof LPG tanks shall be provided with fixed deluge water spray system. 

6. DOORS 

i.  Doors in bedrooms or internal rooms shall not be less than 810 mm in width. 
ii.  The main exit door for the unit or apartment shall not be less than 915 mm in 

clear width. 

iii.  Bathroom doors shall not be less than 710 mm, unless they are serving persons 

with severe mobility impairments, where the required width shall not be less 
than 810 mm. 

iv.  Minimum door width of a balcony, not used for assembly, shall not be less than 

810 mm. 

v.  Balcony and terrace access shall be restricted with door having child lock or latch. 
vi.  Window opening shall be restricted to 100 mm opening with windows safety 

latch. (See Chapter 1, Section 2.17. Balcony, Terrace, Windows and Balustrades) 
vii.  Every closet door latch shall be such that children can open the door from inside 

the closet. 

viii. Every bathroom door shall be designed to allow opening from the outside during 

an emergency when locked. 

ix.  At all times, the Flat is occupied, all locking devices that impede or prohibit egress 

or that cannot be easily disengaged shall be prohibited. 

6. REMOTENESS 

i.  The remoteness of exit stairs required by Section 4.4. Remoteness of Exits does 

OF EXITS 

not apply to Residential Apartments, provided all the following conditions are 
met.                                                                                                                                        
a. Exit corridor is not looped                                                                                                  
b. Every Apartment door is arranged such that the commonpath and dead ends 
are zero.                                                                                                                                              
c. Exit stairs are available on opposite sides of every apartment door.                                 
d. Travel distance from guest room door to exit stair is less than 30 m. 

7. EXITS FROM 

PODIUM 

i.  Residential occupancies having open podiums for assembly purposes, shall ensure 
2 exits remotely located as per Section 4.4. where required commonpath and trav-
el distances are non complaint. 

ii.  Such required 2 exits shall be any of the following. 
a.  Exits leading back into building, to the building exit stairs. 
b.  Enclosed exit stairs to exterior discharge from the podium.  
c.  Open or outside exterior stairs as per Table 3.4., 14., discharging directly outside 

 

to publicway.  

d.  Combinations of above options a, b, and c. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 319 of 1348 

 

 

Figure 3.30.: Non applicability of Stair remoteness of 1/3 diagonal of floor area. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 320 of 1348 

5.5.2.  Residential, Group B. (Staff Accommodation, Hostels, Residential Board and care) 
 

5.5.1.1. The Residential Group B, (Staff Accommodation, Hostels, Residential Board and 
care) occupancies shall comply with Table 3.25. along with all other sections of 
this chapter. Where conflicts arise between this section and other sections of 
this Chapter or code, the requirements of this section shall prevail. 

Table 3.25.: Residential, Group B. (Staff Accommodation, Hostels, Residential Board and care) 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  MULTIPLE            

i.  No dwelling unit shall have its sole means of egress pass through any non-

OCCUPANCY 

residential or non healthcare occupancy of the same building. 

ii.  No Residential, Group B occupancy shall be located above a nonresidential 

or non-health care occupancy, unless the Residential, Group B occupancy 
and exits therefrom are separated from the nonresidential or non-health 
care occupancy by construction having a minimum 2-hour fire resistance 
rating. 

3.  CORRIDOR 

i.  Every sleeping room, living space, dining area shall have access to exit corri-

4. SEPARATION 

dor. 

ii.  Corridor shall be minimum of 1200 mm in width. 
iii.  Corridor shall be separated from other areas of the building by 1 hour fire 

resistance rated construction. 

iv.  Grilles and louvers shall be prohibited in corridors. 

i.  Sleeping rooms shall be separated from each other by walls and floors con-
structed as fire barriers having a minimum of 1 hour fire resistance rating. 

ii.  Sleeping rooms shall be separated from corridor by walls and floors con-

structed as fire barriers having a minimum of 1 hour fire resistance rating. 

iii.  Cross-corridor openings in smoke barriers shall be protected by a pair of 

swinging doors. 

5.  SINGLE EXIT     

PERMISSION 

i.  Single exit shall not be permitted. 
ii.  2 exits shall be available from every part of every floor. 

6.  SMOKE                    

i.  Floors exceeding 2000 m2 shall be subdivided into minimum of 2 smoke 

COMPARTMENT 

compartments, not exceeding 61 m travel distance from any point to reach 
a door in the smoke barrier. 

7.  HAZARDOUS AREA         

i.  Boiler and Heater rooms shall be separated by fire barriers having 1 hour 

SEPARATION 

fire resistance rating and sprinklers shall be provided. 

ii.  Bulk and central Laundry shall be shall be separated by fire barriers having 1 

hour fire resistance rating. and sprinklers shall be provided. 

iii.  Plant maintenance, paint shops shall be separated by fire barriers having 1 

hour fire resistance rating and sprinklers shall be provided. 

iv.  Soiled linen rooms shall have 1-hour fire resistance rating and shall be sprin-

klered.   

v.  Garbage rooms shall be separated by fire barriers having 1 hour fire re-

sistance rating and sprinklers shall be provided. 

vi.  Garbage chutes shall have 2 hour fire resistance rating. 
vii. storage rooms outside dwelling units shall be separated by fire barriers hav-

ing 1 hour fire resistance rating and sprinklers shall be provided. 

viii. On roof LPG tanks shall be provided with fixed deluge water spray system. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 321 of 1348 

5.5.3.  Residential, Group C. (Labor Accommodation) 
 

5.5.1.1. The Residential Group C, (Labor Accommodation) occupancies shall comply 

with Table 3.26. along with all other sections of this chapter. Where conflicts 
arise between this section and other sections of this Chapter or code, the re-
quirements of this section shall prevail. 

Table 3.26.: Residential, Group C. (Labor Accommodation) 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  MULTIPLE  

i.  No labor room shall have its sole means of egress pass through any nonresiden-

OCCUPANCY 

tial occupancy of the same building. 

ii.  No labor rooms shall be located above a nonresidential, unless the labor accom-
modation and exits there from are separated from the nonresidential occupancy 
by construction having a minimum 1-hour fire resistance rating. 

2.  CORRIDOR 

i.  Every labor room, living space, dining area shall have access to exit corridor either 

enclosed internal or external open corridor. 

ii.  Corridor shall be minimum of 1200 mm in width. 
iii.  Corridor shall be separated from other areas of the building by 1 hour fire re-

sistance rated construction, unless it is an open corridor. 

iv.  Grilles and louvers shall be prohibited in corridors. 

3. SEPARATION 

i.  Labor rooms shall be separated from each other by walls and floors constructed 

as fire barriers having a minimum of 1 hour fire resistance rating. 

ii.  Sleeping rooms shall be separated from enclosed internal corridor by walls and 

floors constructed as fire barriers having a minimum of 1 hour fire resistance 
rating. 

iii.  Kitchen is allowed on any floor provided, it is separated from rest of the area by 1 

hour fire resistance rated construction. 

4.  SINGLE EXIT 
PERMISSION 

i.  Single exit shall not be permitted. 
ii.  2 enclosed exits shall be available from every part of every floor. 

5.  HAZARDOUS 

i.  Boiler and Heater rooms shall be separated by fire barriers having 1 hour fire re-

AREA         
SEPARATION 

sistance rating and sprinklers shall be provided. 

ii.  Bulk and central Laundry shall be shall be separated by fire barriers having 1 hour 

fire resistance rating. and sprinklers shall be provided. 

iii.  Plant maintenance, paint shops shall be separated by fire barriers having 1 hour 

fire resistance rating and sprinklers shall be provided. 

iv.  Garbage rooms shall be separated by fire barriers having 1 hour fire resistance 

rating and sprinklers shall be provided. 

v.  Garbage chutes shall have 2 hour fire resistance rating. 
vi.  storage rooms outside dwelling units shall be separated by fire barriers having 1 

hour fire resistance rating or sprinklers shall be provided. 

vii.  On roof LPG tanks shall be provided with fixed deluge water spray system. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 322 of 1348 

5.6.  Private Villa. 
 

5.6.1.  The Private Villa occupancies shall comply with Table 3.27. along with all other sections 

of this chapter. Where conflicts arise between this section and other sections of this 
Chapter or code, the requirements of this section shall prevail. 

 
5.6.2.  Private Villa is Single family dwelling unit, generally ground with first floor, built and 
solely owned by individual resident on the individual plot.  The Private Villa require-
ments are not applicable to commercial villas and group of villas. please see Section 5.7. 
for Villas other than private villa. 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

Table 3.27.: Private Villa 

1.  MULTIPLE  

OCCUPANCY 

i.  No private villa shall have its sole means of egress pass through any nonresiden-
tial occupancy of the same building, unless building is sprinklered and egress is 
not through hazardous content locations. 

ii.  No private villa shall have its sole means of egress pass through any nonresiden-

tial occupancy of the same building, unless such egress is separated from non-
residential occupancies by 1 hour fire resistance rated corridor and egress is not 
through hazardous content locations. 

iii.  No private villa shall have its sole means of egress pass through any nonresiden-

tial occupancy of the same building, unless non residential occupancy is fully 
sprinklered as per chapter 9. 

2. EXITS 

i.  Every sleeping room and every living area of a private villa shall have primary, 

means of escape (Which can be a door,  stairway or ramp providing a means of 
unobstructed travel to the outside and a secondary means of escape. If the villa is 
sprinkler protected, the secondary means of escape shall not be required. 

ii.  However, Civil Defence highly  recommends second primary escape in addition to 

Table 3.27.2.i. A means of egress through roof from where a fixed stair either 
steel or concrete or spiral stair leading to the ground shall be acceptable as se-
cond primary means of escape.  

iii.  Where any floor within villa exceeds 400 m2, two primary means of escape re-

mote from each other shall be provided. 

iv.  The secondary means of egress can be any of the following.                                                                                                                                   

a. Door, Stairway or ramp, remote from primary exit, leading to outside.                                                                
b. A passage through an adjacent non lockable space, set back area, remote from 
primary exit and leading to outside.                                                                                      
c. A permanent stair reaching to roof and from roof an outside stair, either spiral, 
steel or standard, leading to level of discharge remote from primary exit.                  
d. An operable window on the exterior wall, measuring not less than 510 mm in 
width and 610 mm in height, with a clear opening not less than 0.53 m2, and hav-
ing its bottom not more than 6100 mm from finished ground floor. 

v.  Spiral stairs, winders and open stairs shall be permitted in other than access and 

exit from basements.  

vi.  Basements shall have standard enclosed exit stair leading to discharge level. 

3. DOOR 

i.  Every closet door latch shall be such that children can open the door from inside 

the closet. 

ii.  Every bathroom door shall be designed to allow opening from the outside during 

an emergency when locked. 

iii.  At all times, the villa is occupied, all locking devices that impede or prohibit egress 

or that cannot be easily disengaged shall be prohibited. 

 
4.  CORRIDOR/ 

i.  Hallway shall be minimum of 915 mm in width and a clear headroom of 2030 mm 

HALLWAY 

without obstructions. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 323 of 1348 

5.7.  Commercial Villa. 
 

5.7.1.  The Commercial Villa occupancies shall comply with Table 3.28. along with all 
other sections of this chapter. Where conflicts arise between this section and 
other sections of this Chapter or code, the requirements of this section shall 
prevail. 

Table 3.28.: Commercial Villa 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  MULTIPLE  

i.  No commercial villa shall have its sole means of egress pass through any nonresi-

OCCUPANCY 

dential occupancy of the same building. 

ii.  No commercial villa shall have its sole means of egress pass through any nonresi-
dential occupancy of the same building, unless such egress is separated from non
-residential occupancies by 1 hour fire resistance rated corridor and egress is not 
through hazardous content locations. 

iii.  No commercial villa shall have its sole means of egress pass through any nonresi-
dential occupancy of the same building, unless non residential occupancy is fully 
sprinklered as per chapter 9. 

2. SEPARATION 

i.  Commercial villas shall be separated from each other by a 2 hour fire resistance 

rated construction. 

3. EXITS 

i.  Every sleeping room and every living area of a private villa shall have primary, 

means of escape (Which can be a door,  stairway or ramp providing a means of 
unobstructed travel to the outside.) and a secondary means of escape. If the villa 
is sprinkler protected, the secondary means of escape shall not be required. 

ii.  However, Civil Defence highly  recommends second primary escape in addition to 

Table 3.28.3.i. A means of egress through roof from where a fixed stair either 
steel or concrete or spiral stair leading to the ground shall be acceptable as se-
cond primary means of escape.  

iii.  Where any floor within villa exceeds 400 m2, two primary means of escape re-

mote from each other shall be provided. 

iv.  The secondary means of egress can be any of the following.                                                                                                                                   

a. Door, Stairway or ramp, remote from primary exit, leading to outside.                                                                
b. A passage through an adjacent non lockable space, set back area, remote from 
primary exit and leading to outside.                                                                                      
c. A permanent stair reaching to roof and from roof an outside stair, either spiral, 
steel or standard, leading to level of discharge remote from primary exit.                  
d. An operable window on the exterior wall, measuring not less than 510 mm in 
width and 610 mm in height, with a clear opening not less than 0.53 m2, and hav-
ing its bottom not more than 6100 mm from finished ground floor. 

v.  Spiral stairs, winders and open stairs shall be permitted in other than access and 

exit from basements.  

vi.  Basements shall have standard enclosed exit stair leading to discharge level. 

4. DOOR 

i.  Every closet door latch shall be such that children can open the door from inside 

the closet. 

ii.  Every bathroom door shall be designed to allow opening from the outside during 

an emergency when locked. 

iii.  At all times, the villa is occupied, all locking devices that impede or prohibit 

egress or that cannot be easily disengaged shall be prohibited. 

5.  CORRIDOR/ 

i.  Hallway shall be minimum of 915 mm in width and a clear headroom of 2030 mm 

HALLWAY 

without obstructions. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 324 of 1348 

5.8.  Detention and Correctional, Group A, B, C. 
 

5.8.1.  The Detention and Correctional, Group A, B, C occupancies shall comply with Table 3.29. 

along with all other sections of this chapter. Where conflicts arise between this section 
and other sections of this Chapter or code, the requirements of this section shall prevail. 
 

5.8.2.  The Detention and Correctional occupancies shall be designed, constructed, maintained, 
and operated to minimize the possibility of a fire emergency requiring the evacuation of 
occupants.  

 
5.8.3.  Extensions, expansions of existing Detention and Correctional occupancies shall be sep-
arated from any existing structure not conforming to the provisions of this chapter by a 
fire barrier having not less than a 2-hour fire resistance rating. 

Table 3.29.: Detention and Correctional 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  HORIZONTAL 

i.  Horizontal exits shall be permitted to comprise 100 percent of the exits re-

EXIT 

2. CORRIDORS 

3.  SINGLE EXIT 
PERMISSION 

quired, provided that a secondary exit, other than a horizontal exit, located in 
another (not necessarily adjacent) fire compartment is accessible without re-
turning through the compartment of fire origin. 

i.  Minimum aisle, ramp and corridor width shall be 1220 mm. 
ii.  Every sleeping room shall have a door leading directly to an exit access corridor, 
unless the intervening room, if any, is a day room, group activity room or other 
common space. 

i.  Single exit shall not be permitted. 
ii.  2 enclosed exits shall be available from every part of every floor. 
iii.  Not less than one exit shall be accessible from each fire compartment and each 
smoke compartment into which residents are potentially moved in a fire emer-
gency, with the exits arranged so that egress is possible without returning 
through the zone of fire origin. 

4. TWO EXIT 

i.  Every room or space larger than 280 m2 shall have 2 separate exits, remote from 

DOORS        
REQUIREMENT 

5.  EXIT             
DISCHARGE 

6. DOORS 

 

each other as per Section 4.4. 

i.  Exit discharge shall be permitted to be into fenced or walled court yard, provid-

ed not more than 2 such court yard walls are common to the building walls 
from which egress is being made. 

ii.  Such enclosed yards or courts used for exit discharge in accordance shall be of 

sufficient size to accommodate all occupants at a distance of not less than 15 m, 
from the building while providing a net area of 1.4 m2 per person. 

iii.  Exit discharge shall be permitted to be into a fire compartment separated from 
other compartments by 1 hour fire resistance rated construction, and not more 
than 50 percent of the exits discharge into a single fire compartment. 

i.  Doors to resident sleeping rooms shall not be less than 710 mm in width, unless 
they are serving persons with severe mobility impairments, where the required 
width shall not be less than 810 mm. 

ii.  Doors in means of egress shall be permitted to be locked, remotely operated, 
access controlled, power operated provided staff is available at all times to un-
lock the doors during emergencies. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 325 of 1348 

Table 3.29.: Detention and Correctional 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

6.  SMOKE            

COMPARTMENT 

i.  Every floor of Detention and Correctional occupancies, having detention and 
correction activity shall be divided into minimum of 2 smoke compartments, 
not exceeding 200 residents for each compartment. The smoke barrier shall be 
1 hour fire resistance rated. 

ii.  Smoke compartment area shall be such that Travel distance from any point in 

a room to smoke barrier door shall not exceed 61 m.  

iii.  Compartments shall also be permitted to be achieved by building separation 

from resident areas by 2 hour fire resistance rated construction OR Horizontal 
exits OR Smoke compartments discharging directly to outside fenced yard OR 
Secured open area with holding space located 15 m from housing area, provid-
ing 1.4 m2 refuge area per person. 

iv.  Windows in smoke barrier shall be fixed fire rated window assemblies. 
v.  Vision panels in smoke compartment doors shall be of fire rated glazing in ap-

proved frames . The bottom of the vision panel shall not be more than 1090 
mm from finished floor. 

 

Figure 3.31.: Acceptable exit discharge in Detention and Correctional facility 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 326 of 1348 

5.9.  Hotel, Group A, B, C. 
 

5.9.1.  The Hotel, Group A, B, C. (Hotels, Hotel Apartments, Resorts, Dormitories, Mo-
tels) occupancies shall comply with Table 3.30. along with all other sections of 
this chapter. Where conflicts arise between this section and other sections of 
this Chapter or code, the requirements of this section shall prevail. 

Table 3.30.: Hotel, Group A, C. (Hotels, Hotel Apartments, Resorts, Dormitories, Motels) 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. MULTIPLE        
OCCUPANCY 

2. CORRIDORS 

i.  No Guest room or guest suite or dormitory sleeping room shall have its sole 

means of egress pass through any nonresidential occupancy of the same 
building. 

ii.  No Guest room or guest suite or dormitory sleeping room shall have its sole 

means of egress pass through any nonresidential occupancy of the same 
building, unless such egress is separated from non-residential occupancies by 
1 hour fire resistance rated corridor and egress is not through hazardous con-
tent locations. 

iii.  No Guest room or guest suite or dormitory sleeping room shall have its sole 

means of egress pass through any nonresidential occupancy of the same 
building, unless non residential occupancy is fully sprinklered as per chapter 
9. 

i.  Minimum common exit corridor width shall be 1200 mm. 
ii.  Corridor shall have 1 hour fire resistance rated construction. 
iii.  Every sleeping room or suite shall have a door leading directly to an exit ac-

cess corridor, unless the intervening room, if any, is a day room, group activi-
ty room or other common space. 

iv.  Transoms, louvers, or transfer grilles shall be prohibited in walls or doors of 

exit access corridors. 

3.  SINGLE EXIT  
PERMISSION 

i.  Single exit shall not be permitted. 
ii.  2 enclosed exits shall be available from every part of every floor. 

4. TWO EXIT DOORS         

i.  Any guest room  or any guest suite or dormitory sleeping room larger than      

REQUIREMENTS 

185 m2, shall have 2 exit access doors remotely located from each other as 
per Section 4.4. 

5. SEPARATION  

i.  Each hotel guest room, including guest suites, and dormitory room shall be 
separated from other guest rooms or dormitory rooms by walls and floors 
constructed as fire barriers having a minimum 1-hour fire resistance rating. 

ii.  Kitchen shall be separated from rest of the hotel area by 1 hour fire re-

sistance rated construction. 

6.  EXIT DISCHARGE 

i.  Exit discharge shall be permitted to be into fenced or walled court yard, pro-

vided not more than 2 such court yard walls are common to the building 
walls from where egress is being made. 

ii.  Such enclosed yards or courts used for exit discharge in accordance shall be 
of sufficient size to accommodate all occupants at a distance of not less than 
15 m, from the building while providing a net area of 1.4 m2 per person. 

iii.  Exit discharge shall be permitted to be into a fire compartment separated 
from other compartments or building by 1 hour fire resistance rated con-
struction. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 327 of 1348 

Table 3.30.: Hotel, Group A, C. (Hotels, Hotel Apartments, Resorts) 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

7. DOORS 

i.  Balcony and terrace access shall be restricted with door having child lock or 

latch. 

ii.  Window opening shall be restricted to 100 mm opening with windows safety 

latch. (See Chapter 1, section 2.17. Balcony, Terrace and Windows) 

iii.  Doors in resident or guest sleeping rooms or internal rooms shall not be less 

than 810 mm in width. 

iv.  The main exit door for the unit shall not be less than 915 mm in clear width. 
v.  Bathroom doors shall not be less than 710 mm, unless they are not serving per-
sons with severe mobility impairments, where the required width shall not be 
less than 810 mm. 

vi.  Minimum door width of a balcony, not used for assembly, shall not be less than 

810 mm. 

8.  EXIT             
DISCHARGE 

i.  The distance of travel from the termination of the exit enclosure to an exterior 
door leading to a public way through enclosed corridor shall not exceed 30 m. 

9.  HAZARDOUS 
AREA             
SEPARATION 

i.  Boiler and fuel fired Heater rooms shall be separated by fire barriers having 1 

hour fire resistance rating and sprinklers. 

ii.  Employee locker rooms shall be separated by fire barriers having 1 hour fire 

resistance rated construction. 

iii.  Gift shops shall be separated by fire barriers having 1 hour fire resistance rated 

construction and sprinklers. 

iv.  Bulk and central Laundry shall be shall be separated by fire barriers having 1 

hour fire resistance rating and sprinklers.. 

v.  Plant maintenance, paint shops shall be separated by fire barriers having 1 hour 

fire resistance rating and sprinklers. 

vi.  Soiled linen rooms shall have 1-hour fire resistance rating and shall be sprin-

klered.   

vii. Garbage rooms shall be separated by fire barriers having 1 hour fire resistance 

rating and sprinklers. Garbage chutes shall have 2 hour fire resistance rating. 
viii. Storage rooms shall be separated by fire barriers having 1 hour fire resistance 

rating and sprinklers. 

ix.  LPG tanks shall be provided with deluge water spray system. 

10. FURNISHINGS 

i.  Draperies, curtains, and other similar loosely hanging furnishings and decora-

tions shall meet the flame propagation performance criteria and shall be listed 
and approved by Civil Defence. See Section 7 for Material Approval. 

ii.  Upholstered Furniture, Mattresses , Carpets shall be listed and approved by Civ-

il Defence. See Section 7 for Material Approval. 

 

 

Figure 3.32.: Termination of Interior Exit Stairs in Hotels 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 328 of 1348 

Table 3.30.: Hotel, Group A, C. (Hotels, Hotel Apartments, Resorts) 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

11.  REMOTENESS  

i.  The remoteness of exit stairs required by Section 4.4. Remoteness of Exits 

OF EXITS 

does not apply to Hotels, Hotel Apartments, provided all the following condi-
tions are met.                                                                                                                                         
a. Exit corridor is not looped                                                                                                  
b. Every guest room doors are arranged such that the commonpath and 
dead ends are zero.                                                                                                                                              
c. Exit stairs are available on opposite sides of every guest room door.                                 
d. Travel distance from guest room door to exit stair is less than 30 m. 

12. EXITS FROM   

i.  Hotel occupancies having open podiums for assembly purposes, shall ensure 

PODIUM 

2 exits remotely located as per Section 4.4.  

ii.  Such required 2 exits shall be any of the following. 
a.  Exits leading back into building, to the building exit stairs. 
b.  Enclosed exit stairs to exterior discharge from the podium.  
c.  Open or outside exterior stairs as per Table 3.4., 14., discharging directly 

outside to publicway.  

d.  Combinations of above options a, b, and c. 

 

Figure 3.32.: Non applicability of Stair remoteness of 1/3 diagonal of floor area. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 329 of 1348 

5.10. Daycare, Group A, B. 
 

5.10.1.  The Day care, Group A, B. (Child day care, Old age day care, Adult day care) 

occupancies shall comply with Table 3.31. along with all other sections of this 
chapter. Where conflicts arise between this section and other sections of this 
Chapter or code, the requirements of this section shall prevail. 

Table 3.31.: Day Care, Group A, B. (Child day care, Old age day care, Adult day care) 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. MULTIPLE       
OCCUPANCY 

i.  Where day care occupancies are situated in other occupancies, and if the two 

exit accesses from a day-care occupancy enter the same corridor as other occu-
pancy (such as an apartment occupancy, Residential occupancy, or hotel occu-
pancy) the exit accesses shall be separated in the corridor by a 1 hour smoke 
partition which is located so that it has an exit on each side.  

ii.  No Day care room shall have its sole means of egress pass through any nonresi-

dential occupancy of the same building, unless non residential occupancy is fully 
sprinklered as per chapter 9. 

2. CORRIDORS 

i.  Minimum common exit corridor width shall be 1200 mm. 
ii.  Corridor shall have 1 hour fire resistance rated construction if building is not 

sprinklered. 

iii.  Every Day care room shall have a door leading directly to an exit access corri-

dor. 

iv.  Transoms, louvers, or transfer grilles shall be prohibited in walls or doors of exit 

access corridors. 

3.  SINGLE EXIT  
PERMISSION 

i.  Single exit shall not be permitted. 
ii.  2 enclosed exits shall be available from every part of every floor. 

4.  TWO EXIT 

i.  Any Day care room larger than 185 m2, shall have 2 exit corridor access doors 

DOORS              
REQUIREMENTS 

5.  RESCUE         
WINDOW IN 
NON            
SPRINKLERED 
BUILDINGS 

remotely located from each other as per Section 4.4. 

i.  Every day care room or space, in non-sprinklered buildings, normally subject to 

client occupancy shall have at least one window with a fixed  breakable glass, 
having area clear opening not less than 510 mm in width and 610 mm in  height, 
and 0.5 m2 in area, located not more than 1120 mm above the floor for an 
emergency rescue . 

ii.  Such window shall be on the exterior wall of the room, accessible from public 

way  to the Civil Defence rescue team. 

6.  DOORS 

i.  Balcony and terrace access shall be restricted with door having child lock or 

latch. 

ii.  Window opening shall be restricted to 100 mm opening with windows safety 

latch. (See Chapter 1, section 2.17. Balcony, Terrace and Windows) 

iii.  Every closet door latch shall be such that children can open the door from in-

side the closet. 

iv.  Every bathroom door shall be designed to allow opening from the outside dur-

ing an emergency when locked. 

v.  At all times, the Day care occupancy is occupied, all locking devices that impede 

or prohibit egress or that cannot be easily disengaged shall be prohibited. 

7.  SMOKE             

i.  Child day care and old age day care (Day care, Group A) occupancies shall be 

COMPARTMENT 

 

located within one storey above level of exit discharge. If day care, group A oc-
cupancies are located two or more levels above the level of exit discharge, each 
floor shall be subdivided into minimum of 2 smoke compartments with smoke 
barrier having 1 hour fire resistance rated construction. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 330 of 1348 

5.11. Mercantile, Group A, B. C 
 

5.11.1.  The Mercantile, Group A, B. and C (Retail, Wholesale, Supermarkets, Stores, 
Services) occupancies shall comply with Table 3.32. along with all other sec-
tions of this chapter. Where conflicts arise between this section and other sec-
tions of this Chapter or code, the requirements of this section shall prevail. 

Table 3.32.: Mercantile, Group A, B. and C (Retail, Wholesale, Supermarkets, Stores) 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. MULTIPLE    

i. 

OCCUPANCY 

In other than bulk merchandising mercantile occupancies, atrium walls shall be 
permitted to serve as part of the separation required for creating separated oc-
cupancies on a storey-by-storey basis from nonhazardous spaces and other occu-
pancies. 

2. CORRIDORS 

i.  Where exit access in class A Mercantile is through a corridor, such corridor shall 
be 1525 mm in width and separated from other parts of building by 1 hour fire 
resistance rated construction, if building is not sprinklered. 

3. AISLES 

i.  Aisles in Class C Mercantile, Supermarkets ((Having area <280m2, and single sto-

rey) shall not be less than 915 mm in clear width. 

ii.  Aisles in Class B Mercantile, Supermarkets, Hypermarkets (Having area <2800m2, 

and <3 storey) shall not be less than 1200 mm in clear width. 

iii.  Aisles in Class A Mercantile, Hypermarkets (Having area >2800m2, and >3 storey) 

shall not be less than 1525 mm in clear width. 

iv.  Aisles leading to each exit shall be required, and the aggregate width of such 

aisles shall be not less than the required width of the exit. 

4. EXITS 

i.  Not less than 50 % of the exits shall be reached without passing through check-

out or cash counters. 

ii.  Where wheeled carts or buggies are used by customers, adequate provision shall 
be made for the transit and parking of such carts to minimize the possibility that 
they might obstruct means of egress. 

iii.  Not more than  50% of the exits access through store rooms, packing, loading and 
unloading areas  with aisles of not less than 1200 mm in width shall be permitted, 
provided that the building is fully sprinklered, the store room is not subject to 
locking, the path of travel through the storeroom shall be defined, direct, and 
continuously maintained in an unobstructed condition.  

iv.  Exits through kitchen shall not be permitted. 

5.  SINGLE EXIT 
PERMISSION 

i.  Single exit shall not be permitted. 
ii. 

Inside Open stairs or inside open ramps shall not be permitted to serve as a com-
ponent of the required means of egress system for more than one floor. 

iii.  2 enclosed exits shall be available from every part of every floor. And shall be 

independent of any open stair. 

iv.  A single means of egress shall be permitted in Class C, Mercantile (Having  area 
<280m2), provided that the travel distance does not exceed (S 30 m, NS 23 m) 
measured to nearest exit directly to outside or to mall. 

v.  A single means of egress shall be permitted from a mezzanine of any mercantile 
occupancy, provided that the common path does not exceed (S 30 m, NS 23 m) 
measured to outside or to the mall.  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 331 of 1348 

Table 3.32.: Mercantile, Group A, B and C (Retail, Wholesale, Supermarkets, Stores) 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

6.  OPEN SPACES 
WITH               
CLOSELY 
SPACED   
SPRINKLERS 

i. 

ii. 

In class A and B mercantile occupancies protected with a sprinkler system, unpro-
tected vertical openings shall be permitted between any two floors or among the 
street floor, the first adjacent floor below, and the adjacent floor (or mezzanine) 
above, provided the occupancy does not contain high hazard contents 
In class C mercantile occupancies protected with a sprinkler system, unprotected 
openings shall be permitted between the street floor and the mezzanine, provid-
ed  the does not contain high hazard contents.  

5.  SEPARATION 

i.  Parking structures shall be separated from mercantile occupancy with fire barrier 

having a minimum 2-hour fire resistance rating. 

ii.  Openings in such separated parking structures shall not be required to be pro-
tected if the parking is enclosed and the parking and building are sprinklered, t 
the openings do not exceed 25 percent of the area of the fire barrier in which 
they are located, are used as a public entrance and for associated sidelight func-
tions, means are provided to prevent spilled fuel from accumulating adjacent to 
the openings and entering the building, and the openings are protected as a 
smoke partition with no minimum fire protection rating required. 

iii.  When the openings in such separated parking structures are not protected per 
previous item, the parking shall have physical mean to prevent vehicles from be-
ing parked or driven within  3 m of the openings. 

iv.  High hazard content areas shall be separated from other parts of the building by 

1 hour fire resistance rated construction. 

v.  Kitchens shall be separated from other parts of the building by 1 hour fire re-

sistance rated construction. 

6. EXITS FROM 

i.  Mercantile occupancies having open podiums for assembly purposes, shall ensure 

PODIUM 

2 exits remotely located as per Section 4.4.  

ii.  Such required 2 exits shall be any of the following. 
a.  Exits leading back into building, to the building exit stairs. 
b.  Enclosed exit stairs to exterior discharge from the podium.  
c.  Open or outside exterior stairs as per Table 3.4., 14., discharging directly outside 

to publicway.  

d.  Combinations of above options a, b, and c. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 332 of 1348 

5.12. Mall, Group A. (Covered Mall) 
 

5.12.1.  The Mall, Group A, (Covered Mall) occupancies shall comply with Table 3.33. 

along with all other sections of this chapter. Where conflicts arise between this 
section and other sections of this Chapter or code, the requirements of this 
section shall prevail. 

Table 3.33.: Mall, Group A, (Covered Mall) 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. MULTIPLE         

OCCUPANCY 

i.  The mall building shall be treated as a single building for the purpose of calcu-
lation of means of egress and shall be subject to the requirements for appro-
priate occupancies. 

2.  MALL             
PEDESTRIAN 
WAY 

3.  EXITS 

i.  Mall pedestrian way shall be not less than 6100  mm wide in its narrowest di-

mension. 

ii.  On each side of the mall floor area, the mall shall be provided with an unob-
structed exit access of not less than 3050  mm in clear width parallel to, and 
adjacent to, the mall tenant front. 

iii.  Exit access of 3050 mm is acceptable only where tenant spaces open to such 
exit access on only one side. Where exit access caters to tenant spaces on its 
both sides, the exit access shall not be less than 6100 mm. 

iv.  Transoms, louvers, or transfer grilles shall be prohibited in walls or doors of 

exit access corridors. 

i.  Minimum width of exit shall not be less than 1675 mm. 
ii.  Every floor of a mall shall be provided with the number of means of egress as 

required by occupant load and capacity, with not less than two means of 
egress remotely located from each other available from any point in the mall. 
iii.  Class A and Class B mercantile occupancies connected to a mall shall be provid-

ed with the number of means of egress as required by occupant load and ca-
pacity, with not less than two means of egress remotely located from one an-
other. 

iv.  Each individual anchor building shall have its 100 % means of egress independ-

ent of the mall. 

v.  Each individual major tenant of a mall shall have a minimum of 50% of its re-

quired means of egress independent of the mall. 

vi.  Each Assembly occupancy within mall having an occupant load of more than 

500 shall have a minimum of 50% of its required means of egress independent 
of the mall. 

4.  CORRIDORS 

i.  Minimum width of exit access corridors and passageways shall not be less than 

AND EXIT            
PASSAGEWAYS 

that required for the occupant load it is serving but in no case, not less than 
1675 mm. 

ii.  Exit passageways in a mall building shall be permitted to accommodate the 

occupant loads independently from either occupant load assigned from only 
mall or largest occupant load assigned from a single tenant space. 

5. KIOSKS 

i.  The minimum horizontal separation between kiosks or groups of kiosks shall 

not be less than 6 m. 

ii.  The minimum pedestrian way and exit accessway available from any side of 

the kiosk shall not be less than 1.5 m. 

iii.  Each kiosk, or group of kiosks, or similar structure shall have a maximum area 

of 18 m2. 

 

iv.  See Chapter 1, Table 1.9.48. and material approval requirement in                   

Section 7.1.40. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 333 of 1348 

Table 3.33.: Mall, Group A, (Covered Mall) 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

6.  SEPARATION 

i.  The wall dividing the tenant spaces shall have a 1-hour fire-resistance-rated and 
such  separation shall extend from the floor to the floor deck above, to the roof, 
or to the ceiling where the ceiling is constructed to limit the transfer of smoke. 
ii.  No separation is required between tenant front and the mall pedestrian way. 
iii.  Corridors and exit passageways shall be separated from equipment rooms, ser-

vice elevators, janitor closets by 1 hour fire resistance rated construction. 

 

Figure 3.34.: Mall  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 334 of 1348 

5.13. Mall, Group B. (Open Mall ) 
 

5.13.1.  The Mall, Group B, (Open Mall) occupancies shall comply with Table 3.34. 

along with all other sections of this chapter. Where conflicts arise between this 
section and other sections of this Chapter or code, the requirements of this 
section shall prevail. 

Table 3.34.: Mall, Group B, (Open Mall) 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. MULTIPLE      
OCCUPANCY 

i.  The open mall building shall be treated as a single building for the purpose of 

calculation of means of egress and shall be subject to the requirements for 
appropriate occupancies. 

2.  OPEN MALL            

i.  Mall pedestrian way shall be unroofed serving multiple tenants, roofed or un-

PEDESTRIAN 
WAY 

roofed in ground only or not more than 3 levels. 

ii.  Mall pedestrian way shall not be less than 3 m wide in its narrowest dimen-

3.  EXITS 

sion. 

iii.  On each side of the mall floor area, the mall shall be provided with an unob-
structed exit access of not less than 3 m in clear width parallel to, and adja-
cent to, the open mall tenant front. 

i.  Minimum width of exit shall not be less than 1675 mm. 
ii.  Dead end shall be zero. 
iii.  Commonpath shall be zero. 
iv.  Every level of a open mall shall be provided with the number of means of 
egress as required by occupant load and capacity, with not less than two 
means of egress remotely located from each other available from any point in 
the open mall. 

v.  Circulation at above grade shall be permitted to include exterior balconies, 

exterior corridors, exterior open stairs leading to exit discharging at exterior 
grade, outside the open mall. 

4.  CORRIDORS 

i.  Minimum width of exit access corridors and passageways, service corridors 

AND EXIT            
PASSAGEWAYS 

shall not be less than that required for the occupant load it is serving but in no 
case, not less than 1200 mm. 

ii.  Exit passageways in a mall building shall be permitted to accommodate the 
occupant loads independently from the largest occupant load assigned from 
any single tenant space. 

5. KIOSKS 

i.  The minimum horizontal separation between kiosks or groups of kiosks, and 

other structures within the mall shall be 3 m. 

ii.  Each kiosk, or group of kiosks, or similar structure shall have a maximum area 

of 28 m2. 

iii.  See Chapter 1, Table 1.9.48. and material approval requirement in                   

Section 7.1.39. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 335 of 1348 

5.14. Storage, Group A, B, C. (Warehouse, Logistics) 
 

5.14.1.  The Storage, Group A, B, C. (Warehouse, Logistics) occupancies shall comply 
with Table 3.35. along with all other sections of this chapter. Where conflicts 
arise between this section and other sections of this Chapter or code, the re-
quirements of this section shall prevail. 

Table 3.35.: Storage, Group A, B, C. (Warehouse, Logistics) 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  MULTIPLE    
OCCUPANCY 

i. 

Incidental offices, showrooms, dining rooms and Kitchens shall be permitted 
inside the storage occupancies, provided they are separated from storage areas 
by 1 hour fire resistance rated construction. 

2.  STAIRS 

i.  Noncombustible grated stair treads and noncombustible grated landing floors 

ii. 

shall be permitted. 
Industrial equipment access stairs and Spiral stairs shall be permitted, provided 
it is used only to access storage spaces and not offices. 

iii.  Industrial equipment access doors, walkways, platforms, ramps, and stairs that 
serve as access for the involved equipment or storage space shall be permitted. 

3. DOORS 

i.  Roller shutters are not permitted as exit doors. A swing exit door shall be pro-

vided as a means of egress. 

4.  HORIZONTAL 

i.  Horizontal exit barrier shall have two fire door assemblies of which one is per-

EXIT 

mitted to be an automatic sliding fire door or automatic rolling fire shutter. 

5.  SINGLE EXIT 
PERMISSION 

i.  Single exit is permitted in storage areas, provided stored content is not high 
hazard content and total travel distance to outside the building does not ex-
ceed      (S 30 m,   NS 15 m). 

ii.  Single exit from mezzanine is permitted, provided stored content is not high 

hazard content and the travel distance to outside the building does not exceed        
(S 30 m,   NS 15 m). 

iii.  Single exit from Office areas in warehouse shall be permitted, provided the to-

tal travel distance from any point in the office to outside, including travel on 
stair does not exceed (S 30 m,   NS 15 m). 

iv.  All high hazard content areas, storage areas, logistics shall be provided with not 

less than 2 exits remotely located  as per section 4.4 of this chapter. 

6.  CORRIDORS 

i.  Where exit access corridors, passageways and service corridors are provided, 

AND EXIT            
PASSAGEWAYS 

minimum width shall not be less than 1200 mm. 

ii.  Where racks and shelf are provided, they shall be installed 1200 mm away from 

the structure walls. 

iii.  Minimum width between racking or shelf shall not be less than 915 mm. 

7. SEPARATION 

i.  Multi tenant warehouses or group of warehouses shall be separated from each 
other by 1 hour fire resistance rated construction. See Chapter 1, Table 1.9.31. 

ii.  Exit access corridors where provided, in non sprinklered storage occupancies, 

shall be separated from other parts of the building by 1 hour fire resistance 
rated construction. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 336 of 1348 

5.15. Industrial, Group A, B, C. (Process, Manufacturing, Workshops) 
 

5.15.1.  The Industrial, Group A, B, C. (Process, Manufacturing, Workshops) occupan-

cies shall comply with Table 3.36. along with all other sections of this chapter. 
Where conflicts arise between this section and other sections of this Chapter 
or code, the requirements of this section shall prevail. 

Table 3.36.: Industrial, Group A, B, C. (Process, Manufacturing, Workshops) 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  MULTIPLE    
OCCUPANCY 

i. 

Incidental offices, showrooms, dining rooms and Kitchens shall be permitted 
inside the industrial occupancies, provided they are separated from industrial 
areas by 1 hour fire resistance rated construction. 

2.  STAIRS 

i.  Noncombustible grated stair treads and noncombustible grated landing floors 

ii. 

shall be permitted. 
Industrial equipment access stairs and Spiral stairs shall be permitted, provided 
it is used only to access equipment and not offices. 

iii.  Industrial equipment access doors, walkways, platforms, ramps, and stairs that 
serve as access for the involved equipment or storage space shall be permitted. 

3. DOORS 

i.  Roller shutters are not permitted as exit doors. A swing exit door shall be pro-

vided as a means of egress. 

4.  HORIZONTAL 

i.  Horizontal exit barrier shall have two fire door assemblies of which one is per-

EXIT 

mitted to be an automatic sliding fire door or automatic rolling fire shutter. 

5.  SINGLE EXIT 
PERMISSION 

i.  Single exit is not permitted. 
ii.  2 exits shall be provided from every storey or level or section as per Section 4.4 

of this chapter. 

iii.  Not less than 1 exit shall be provided such that exit can be reached without 

traversing to another storey. 

iv.  Single exit is permitted in storage areas, Equipment access provided it is not 

high hazard content area and total travel distance to outside the building does 
not exceed  (S 30 m,  NS 15 m). 

v.  Single exit from Office areas in industrial occupancy shall be permitted, provid-

ed the total travel distance from any point in the office to outside, including 
travel on stair does not exceed (S 30 m,  NS 15 m). 

vi.  All high hazard content areas shall be provided with not less than 2 exits re-

motely located  as per section 4.4 of this chapter. 

6.  CORRIDORS 

i.  Where exit access corridors, passageways and service corridors are provided, 

AND EXIT            
PASSAGEWAYS 

minimum width shall not be less than 1200 mm. 

ii.  Where racks and shelf are provided, they shall be installed 1200 mm away from 

the structure walls. 

iii.  Minimum width between racking or shelf shall not be less than 915 mm. 

7. SEPARATION 

i.  Multi tenant factories, group of factories shall be separated from each other by 

1 hour fire resistance rated construction. See Chapter 1, Table 1.9.31. 

ii.  Exit access corridors where provided, in non sprinklered industrial occupancies, 

shall be separated from other parts of the building by 1 hour fire resistance 
rated construction. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 337 of 1348 

5.16. Parking, Group A, B 
 

5.16.1.  The vehicle parking in either above ground, enclosed or underground structure 

shall comply with Table 3.37. along with all other sections of this chapter. 
Where conflicts arise between this section and other sections of this Chapter 
or code, the requirements of this section shall prevail. 

Table 3.37.: Parking Structure (Open, Enclosed and Robotic) 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  MULTIPLE    
OCCUPANCY 

i.  Parking structures within 3 m of a building shall be separated by fire barrier hav-

ing a minimum 2-hour fire resistance rating. 

ii.  Such fire separation is not required if the parking structure is separated by 3 m or 
more from adjacent  building and is attached only via open vehicle bridge or open 
pedestrian walkway or balconies. 

iii.  Repair activities inside the parking structure  is permitted provided  the occupan-

cy shall not include motor fuel-dispensing facilities.  

iv.  Any occupancy other than parking, situated in parking area shall be separated 

smoke resistant  walls and partitions. 

2.  OPEN           

PARKING 

i.  Each parking level shall have permanent wall openings open to the atmosphere, 
for an area of not less than 0.4m2 for each linear meter of its exterior perimeter. 
ii.  Such openings shall be distributed over 40 percent of the building perimeter sur-

face or uniformly over each of at least two opposing sides.  

iii.  Interior wall lines and column lines shall be at least 20% open, with openings dis-

tributed to provide ventilation.  

iv.  Any part of the carpark shall be within 30 m of the permanent natural ventilation 

opening on the perimeter surface.  

3. ROBOTIC OR 
AUTOMATIC 
PARKING 

i.  The operator shall remain in the area and shall have full control of the automated 

facilities, including means of egress. 

ii.  At least two means of egress remote from each other shall be provided which 

can be Fire Personnel access. 

iii.  Horizontal walkways for access shall be provided at intervals of 6 m vertically and 

30 m  horizontally. 

4.  SINGLE EXIT 
PERMISSION 

i.  Single exit is not permitted. 
ii.  2 exits shall be provided from every storey or level or section as per Section 4.4., 

Table 3.15.b. of this chapter. 

iii.  In 1 level below or 1 level above discharge level of parking, vehicle ramp shall be 

considered as one of the means of egress, provided no shutters or doors are in-
stalled in such ramps. 

5.  FUEL           

i.  Where fuel dispensing is located within parking areas,  Exits shall lead to the out-

DISPENSING 

side of the building on the same level or to stairs, with no upward travel permit-
ted, unless direct outside exits are available from that floor. 

ii.  Any storey below the storey at which fuel is being dispensed shall have exits lead-
ing directly to the outside via outside stairs or doors at the finished ground level. 

6. FLOORING 

i.  Floor surfaces shall be of noncombustible material.  
ii.  Floors shall be graded and equipped with drains. 

7. CARBON     
MONOXIDE 
DETECTION 

i.  Carbon monoxide detection shall be provided in all enclosed parking structures. 
Such CO detection system shall be electrically operated, complete with control 
panel and interfacing with ventilation system. 

8. EXIT SIGNS 
 

i.  Exit signs shall be distinguishable from Vehicle Exit route and emergency Exit di-

rections for people. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 338 of 1348 

5.17. Road and Rail Tunnels 
 

5.17.1.  The Road and Rail Tunnels shall comply with Table 3.38. along with all other 
sections of this chapter. Where conflicts arise between this section and other 
sections of this Chapter or code, the requirements of this section shall prevail. 

Table 3.38.: Road and Rail Tunnel 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  EMERGENCY 

i.  Emergency exits not less than 1200 mm in width shall be provided throughout 

EXITS 

the tunnel spaced not more than 300 m apart. 

ii.  Where tunnels are divided by a minimum of 2-hour fire-rated construction or 

where tunnels are in twin bores, cross-passageways between the two compart-
ments of tunnels, not farther than 200 m apart shall be provided. 

iii.  Cross-passageways shall be permitted to be used in lieu of emergency exit stair-
ways to the surface where trainways in tunnels are divided by a minimum of 2 
hour–rated fire walls or where trainways are in twin bores. 

iv.  An emergency egress walkway with a minimum clear width of 1120 mm shall be 

provided on each side of the cross-passageways. 

v.  Walkways shall be continuous the entire length of the tunnel, terminating at sur-

face grade.  

2.  SIGNAGE 

i.  Reflective, Photoluminescent or lighted directional signs indicating the distance 

to the two nearest emergency exits shall be provided on the side walls at distanc-
es of no more than 25 m.  

ii.  Exit signs shall be distinguishable from Vehicle Exit route and emergency Exit di-

rections for people. 

3. HAZARDOUS 
MATERIALS 

i.  Control of hazardous materials shall comply with the requirements of Code of 

Practice for the Management of Dangerous Goods in the Emirates. 

4. CARBON     
MONOXIDE 
DETECTION 

i.  Carbon monoxide detection shall be provided in the Tunnel. Such CO detection 
system shall be electrically operated, complete with control panel and interfac-
ing with ventilation system. 

5. CCTV 

i.  Tunnels exceeding 90 m in length shall be provided with CCTV system. 

6. SAFETY        

i.  Where the tunnel length equals or exceeds 240 m, such tunnels shall be provided 

PROVISIONS 

with Fire Access, Automatic Fire Detection system, Wet Riser System, Fixed Fire 
Water Suppression system, Portable Fire Extinguishers , Emergency Ventilation 
systems, Emergency Lighting, Emergency power supply as per relevant chapters 
of this code.  

ii.  Additionally, telephones, Drainage system, Traffic Control Systems and Emergen-

cy Response procedures shall be provided for tunnels exceeding 1000 m in 
length. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 339 of 1348 

5.18. Rail and Tram Stations 
 

5.18.1.  Rail and Tram Stations shall comply with Table 3.39. along with all other sec-

tions of this chapter. Where conflicts arise between this section and other sec-
tions of this Chapter or code, the requirements of this section shall prevail. 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

Table 3.39.: Rail and Tram Stations 

1. OCCUPANT 

LOAD 

i.  The occupant load for a station shall be based on the train load of trains simulta-
neously entering the station on all tracks in normal traffic direction plus the sim-
ultaneous entraining load awaiting trains  

2.  EMERGENCY 

i.  At least two means of egress remote from each other shall be provided from 

EXITS 

each station platform. 

ii.  Where means of egress routes from separate platforms converge, the subse-
quent capacity of the egress route shall be sufficient to maintain the required 
evacuation time from the incident platform. 

iii.  A common path of travel from the platform ends shall not exceed 25 m (82 ft.) or 

one car length, whichever is greater. 

iv.  The maximum travel distance on the platform to a point at which a means of 

egress route leaves the platform shall not exceed 100 m . 

v.  Within underground or enclosed trainways, the maximum distance between ex-

its shall not exceed 762 m. 

vi.  A minimum clear width of 1200 mm (47 in.) shall be provided along all platforms, 

corridors, and ramps serving as means of egress. 

vii.  Doors and other openings through the separations shall be 90 minutes fire rated. 
viii. Power substation door shall be 3 hour fire rated. 
ix.  Where a fire door is required to be open, it shall be automatic closing type.  
x.  Horizontal sliding platform screen or platform edge doors shall be permitted to 

separate the platform from the trainways in stations provided that the doors per-
mit emergency egress from the train to the platform regardless of the stopping 
position of the train., the doors provide egress when a force not exceeding 220 N 
(49 lb) is applied from the train side of the doors. And the doors are designed to 
withstand positive and negative pressures caused by passing trains. 

3. ESCALATORS 

i.  Escalators shall be permitted as a means of egress in stations provided that the 

escalators are constructed of noncombustible materials, Escalators running in 
the direction of egress shall be permitted to remain operating and Escalators run-
ning reverse to the direction of egress shall be capable of being stopped remote-
ly or manually. 

ii.  Escalators shall not account for more than half of the means of egress capacity at 

any one level. 

4.  SIGNAGE 

i.  Reflective, Photoluminescent or lighted directional signs indicating the distance 

to the two nearest emergency exits shall be provided on the side walls at distanc-
es of no more than 25 m.  

ii.  Exit signs shall be distinguishable from other signage in the stations. 

5. EVACUATION 

i.  The station also shall be designed to permit evacuation from the most remote 

point on the platform to a point of safety in 6 minutes or less. 

i.  Stations shall be provided with CCTV system. 

TIME 

6. CCTV 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 340 of 1348 

6.  Design, Installation, Inspection and Maintenance of 

Means of Egress  

 

6.1.  General  
 

6.1.1.  The building owner, his appointed representative and the facility management is re-

sponsible to ensure that all the components of means of egress are installed, inspected, 
maintained and repaired to serve their intended purpose during emergencies. 

 
6.1.2.  The building means of egress components such as doors, corridors, stairs shall be in-
spected daily to ensure they are not obstructed, and are not blocked at all times the 
building is occupied.  

 

6.2.  The Doors  
 

6.2.1.  Testing and Acceptance 

 

 

 

 

 

6.2.1.1.  Doors and opening protectives shall be tested as “Door Assembly” by Civil 
Defence approved laboratories and certified by Civil Defence approved cer-
tification bodies. Acceptable test standards shall be as per Section 7. Mate-
rial Test Standards.  

6.2.1.2. 

Individual hardware such as locks, hinges, vision panels etc. or door core 
materials, panels shall not be registered by Civil Defence. Only the final end 
product, the Door Assembly as intended shall be registered by Civil De-
fence. 

6.2.1.3.  All door and opening protectives manufacturers shall be registered with 

Civil Defence. No door assembly shall be sold or distributed in UAE without 
Civil Defence certification and license. 

6.2.2.  Design/ Specification/ Submittals 

 
6.2.3. 
 

6.2.4. 
 

6.2.2.1.  Door proposals, assignment of appropriate fire rating at locations intended 
to achieve required fire protection, latches and arrangements shall be the 
responsibilities of the design consultant.  

Installation  

6.2.3.1.  The installation of door assemblies shall be carried out by Civil Defence ap-

proved installer as per door manufacturer's installation instructions and 
shall comply with local regulations and the construction documents. 

 
Installer Qualification 

6.2.4.1.  The Civil Defence license to the door installer is based on the training and 
certification by the door assembly manufacturer to install manufacturer’s 
products as per specified listed system requirements. 

 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 341 of 13486.2.5. 
 

Inspector Qualification 

6.2.5.1. 

6.2.5.2. 

Inspection shall be consultant’s responsibility to perform inspections or to 
hire Civil Defence approved House of Expertise. Consultant or House of Ex-
pertise, undertaking inspections shall be trained by door manufacturers. 
 
Inspection shall be carried out in accordance with standard international 
inspection criteria and UAE Fire and Life Safety Code of Practice. 

 
6.2.6. 
 

Inspection 

6.2.6.1.  The following door assemblies shall be inspected and tested annually. 
 

a.   Door leaves equipped with panic hardware or fire exit hardware. 
b.  Door assemblies in exit enclosures 
c.  Electrically controlled egress doors 
d.  Door assemblies with special locking arrangements. 

6.2.6.2.  A written record of the inspections and testing shall be signed and kept for 

inspection by the Civil Defence. 

6.2.6.3.  Door assemblies shall be visually inspected from both sides of the opening 

to assess the overall condition of the door assembly. 

 
6.2.6.4.  As a minimum, the following items shall be verified. 
 

 

 

a.  Door labeling shall be verified to confirm the fire rating, valid test certi-

fications and test standards it was tested. 

b.  Floor space on both sides of the openings is clear of obstructions, and 

door leaves open fully and close freely. 

c.  Forces required to set door leaves in motion and move to the fully open 
position do not exceed the requirements of Section 3.2. of this chapter. 
d.  Latching and locking devices comply with requirements of Section 3.2.  
e.  Releasing hardware devices are installed in accordance with Section 

3.2.  

f.  Door leaves of paired openings are installed in accordance with         

Section 3.2.  

g.  Door closers are adjusted properly to control the closing speed of door 

leaves in accordance with accessibility requirements. 

h.  Projection of door leaves into the path of egress does not exceed the 

encroachment permitted by Section 3.2.  

i.  Powered door openings operate in accordance with Section 3.2.  
j.  Signage is intact and legible. 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 342 of 1348k.  Security devices that impede egress are not installed on openings. 
l.  Ensure door hardware marking is present and intact.  
m.  Emergency lighting on access-controlled egress doors and doors 

equipped with delayed-egress locking systems is present and function-
ing. 

n.  Door openings not in proper operating condition shall be repaired or 

replaced without delay 

o.  Door openings and the surrounding areas shall be kept clear of anything 

that could obstruct or interfere with the free operation of the door. 

p.  Blocking or wedging of doors in the open position shall be prohibited. 
q.  Self-closing and automatic closing devices shall be kept in working con-

dition at all times 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 343 of 1348 

7.  Material Test Standards, Approval and registration. 

 
7.1.  Acceptable Test Standards and criteria 

 
7.1.1.  All the Materials, Systems, Assemblies, equipment, Products and Accessories, re-

ferred to in this chapter with respect to Life Safety, Fire Safety and Emergency Ser-
vices shall be Listed, Approved and Registered by the Civil Defence Material Approv-
al Department. 

 
7.1.2.  There is no year of edition mentioned against any test standards. It is the intent of 

Civil Defence to convey to the customers seeking laboratory tests and the test la-
boratories to follow the “LATEST EDITION OF THE TEST STANDARD, AS AND WHEN 
THEY ARE UPGRADED/REVISED/AMENDED, TO THE DATE” 

 
7.1.3.  Fire resistance rated Door Assemblies shall satisfy any of the following tests as per 

specifications required by the code. 

i. 

UL 10B/10C, Standard for Fire Tests of Door Assemblies/ Standard for Positive 
Pressure Fire Tests of Door Assemblies. 

ii.  UL 1784, Standard for Air Leakage Tests of Door Assemblies and Other Opening 

Protectives 

iii.  NFPA 252, Standard methods of fire tests of door assemblies. 
iv.  EN 1634-1: Fire resistance and smoke control tests for door, shutter and, open-

v. 

able window assemblies and elements of building hardware. Fire resistance 
tests for doors, shutters and openable windows. 
EN 1634-2: Fire resistance and smoke control tests for door, shutter and open-
able window assemblies and elements of building hardware - Part 2: Fire re-
sistance characterization test for elements of building hardware 

vi.  EN 1634-3: Fire resistance and smoke control tests for door and shutter assem-

blies, openable windows and elements of building hardware - Part 3: Smoke 
control test for door and shutter assemblies 

vii.  EN 14600: Doorsets and openable windows with fire resisting and/or smoke 

control characteristics - Requirements and classification 

viii.  EN 15269-1: Extended application of test results for fire resistance and/or 

smoke control for door, shutter and openable window assemblies, including 
their elements of building hardware - Part 1: General requirements 

ix.  EN 15269-2: EXAP – Part 2: Fire resistance of hinged and pivoted steel doorsets 

x. 

and openable windows 
EN 15269-3: EXAP – Part 3: Fire resistance of hinged and pivoted timber 
doorsets and openable timber framed windows 

xi.  prEN 15269-4: EXAP – Part 4: Fire resistance of hinged and pivoted glazed 

doorsets and shutter assemblies. 

xii.  prEN 15269-5: EXAP – Part 5: Fire resistance of hinged and pivoted metal 

framed glazed doorsets and openable windows 

xiii.  prEN 15269-6: EXAP – Part 6: Fire resistance of timber sliding doors 
xiv.  EN 15269-7: EXAP – Part 7: Fire resistance for steel sliding doorsets 
xv.  prEN 15269-8: EXAP – Part 8: Fire resistance of timber horizontally folding 

doors. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 344 of 1348xvi. 

prEN 15269-9: EXAP – Part 9: Fire resistance of steel horizontally folding 
doors 

xvii.  EN 15269-10: EXAP – Part 10: Fire resistance of steel rolling shutter assem-

blies 

xx. 

xviii.  prEN 15269-11: EXAP – Part 11: Fire resistance of operable fabric curtains 
EN 15269-20: EXAP – Part 20: Smoke control for hinged and pivoted steel, 
xix. 
timber and metal framed glazed doorsets 
EN 15725: Extended application reports on the fire performance of construc-
tion products and building elements 
EN 16034 – Pedestrian doorsets, industrial, commercial, garage doors, and 
openable windows. Product standard, performance characteristics. Fire re-
sisting and/or smoke control characteristics 

xxi. 

xxii.  BS 8214, Code of Practice for Fire door assemblies. 
xxiii.  BS ISO 12472,  Fire resistance of timber door assemblies. 

7.1.4.  Hardware for Electric Door 

i. 
ii. 

ANSI/UL 294, Standard for Access Control System Units. 
EN 1155: Building hardware - Electrically powered hold-open devices for swing 
doors - Requirements and test methods. 

iii.  EN 13633: Electrically controlled panic exit systems, for use on escape routes - 

Requirements and test methods 

iv.  EN 13637: Building hardware. Electrically controlled exit systems for use on 

escape routes. Requirements and test methods 

v.  BS EN 60730-2-12, Automatic electrical controls for household and similar use.  

Particular requirements for electrically operated door locks. 

vi.  BS EN 14637:2007 - Building hardware.  Electrically controlled hold-open sys-

tems for fire/smoke door assemblies.  Requirements, test methods, application 
and maintenance. 

 

7.1.5.  Panic Hardware and Fire Exit Hardware 

ANSI/UL 305, Standard for Safety Panic Hardware  

i. 
ii.  ANSI/BHMA A156.3, Exit Devices. 
iii.  EN 1125: Building hardware - Panic exit devices operated by a horizontal bar, 

for use on escape routes - Requirements and test methods 

iv.  EN 179: Building hardware - Emergency exit devices operated by a lever handle 

or push pad, for use on escape routes - Requirements and test methods 

vii.  EN 13633: Electrically controlled panic exit systems, for use on escape routes - 

Requirements and test methods 

ix.  EN 1125, Building hardware.  Panic exit devices operated by a horizontal bar, 

for use on escape routes.  Requirements and test methods. 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 345 of 1348 

 

 

7.1.6.  Power-assisted swinging door assemblies  

i. 

BHMA/ANSI A156.19, American National Standard for Power Assist and Low 
Energy Power Operated Doors. 

 

7.1.7.  Fire resistance rated Window Assemblies shall satisfy any of the following 

UL 9, Standard for Fire Tests of Window Assemblies. 

i. 
ii.  UL 1784, Standard for Air Leakage Tests of Door Assemblies and Other Opening 

Protectives 

iii.  NFPA 257, Standard on fire test for window and glass block assemblies. 
iv.  EN 1634-1: Fire resistance and smoke control tests for door, shutter and, open-

v. 

able window assemblies and elements of building hardware. Fire resistance 
tests for doors, shutters and openable windows. 
EN 1634-2, Fire resistance and smoke control tests for door, shutter and open-
able window assemblies and elements of building hardware.  Fire resistance 
characterization test for elements of building hardware. 

vi.  EN 1634-3: Fire resistance and smoke control tests for door and shutter assem-

blies, openable windows and elements of building hardware - Part 3: Smoke 
control test for door and shutter assemblies 

vii.  EN 15269-1, Extended application of test results for fire resistance and/or 

smoke control for door, shutter and openable window assemblies, including 
their elements of building hardware.  General requirements. 

viii.  EN 15269-3, Extended application of test results for fire resistance and/or 

smoke control for door, shutter and openable window assemblies, including 
their elements of building hardware.  Fire resistance of hinged and pivoted 
timber doorsets and openable timber framed windows. 

ix.  EN 15269-5, Extended application of test results for fire resistance and/or 

smoke control for door, shutter and openable window assemblies, including 
their elements of building hardware.  Fire resistance of hinged and pivoted 
metal framed glazed doorsets and openable windows. 
EN 14600: Doorsets and openable windows with fire resisting and/or smoke 
control characteristics - Requirements and classification 

x. 

 

7.1.8.  Fire resistance rated Glazing in Doors and Walls is acceptable with any of the fol-

lowing 

 

i. 

ASTM E 119, Standard Test Methods for Fire Tests of Building Construction and 
Materials 
  UL 263, Standard for Fire Tests of Building Construction and Materials. 

ii. 
iii.    EN 1364-1, Fire resistance tests for non-loadbearing elements - Part 1: Walls; 
iv.    EN 1634 - 1, Fire resistance test for door and shutter assemblies and openable 

v. 

  windows. 
  EN 15254-4: Extended application of results from fire resistance tests - Non-
  loadbearing walls - Part 4: Glazed constructions. 

vi.    BS 476-22: Fire tests on building materials and structures - part 22:  Methods 

  for the determination of the fire resistance of non-loadbearing elements of 
  construction. 

vii.    UL 10B/10C, Standard for Fire Tests of Door Assemblies. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 346 of 1348 
7.1.9.  Glazing in door assembly is acceptable with any of the following 
 

NFPA 252, Standard methods of fire tests of door assemblies. 

i. 
ii.  UL 10B/10C, Standard for Fire Tests of Door Assemblies/ Standard for Positive 

Pressure Fire Tests of Door Assemblies. 

iii.    EN 1634 - 1, Fire resistance test for door and shutter assemblies and openable 

iv. 

  windows. 
 BS ISO 3009:2003 - Fire resistance tests.  Elements of building construction.   
Glazed elements.   

 
7.1.10.  Safety Glazing shall satisfy any of the following 

 
i.  EN 12600, Glass in building - Pendulum test - Impact test method and classifica-

tion for flat glass. 

ii.  ANSI Z97, American National Standard for Safety Glazing Materials Used in 

Buildings -Safety Performance Specifications and Methods of Test 

iii.  CPSC 16 CR 1202 
iv.  For shower enclosures: EN 14428, Shower enclosures - Functional requirements 

and test methods 

v.  BS EN ISO 12543-2, Glass in building.  Laminated glass and laminated safety 

glass.  Laminated safety glass. 

 
7.1.11.  Upholstered furniture is acceptable with any of the following 
 

i.  16 CFR 1634 Flammability Test to Upholstered furniture. 
ii.  EN 1021-1, Fire test to upholstered furniture (Smouldering cigarette) 
iii.  BS 7176, Fire test to upholstered furniture for non domestic seating. 
iv.  BS 5852: Methods of test for assessment of the ignitability of upholstered 

seating by smoldering and flaming ignition sources. 

v.   ASTM  E1537, Standard Test Method for Fire Testing of Upholstered Furniture 
vi.  EN 1021-2, Fire test to upholstered furniture (Match flame) 
vii.  UL 1286, Standard for Office Furnishings 
viii. ASTM F 851, Standard Test Method for Self-Rising Seat Mechanisms. 
ix.  ASTM  E1353, Standard Test Methods for Cigarette Ignition Resistance of Com-

ponents of Upholstered Furniture 

 

 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 347 of 1348 

 

7.1.12.  Combustible Decorative Materials is acceptable with any of the following 

NFPA 701, Fire test to textiles and films. 

 
i. 
ii.  CAN/ULC-S109 Flame tests of flame-resistant fabrics and films 
iii.  EN  13823: Reaction to fire tests for building products - Building products ex-

cluding floorings exposed to the thermal attack by a single burning item. 

iv.  EN-ISO 11925-2: Reaction to fire tests - Ignitability of products subjected to 

direct impingement of flame - Part 2: Single-flame source test. 
EN-ISO 1182: Reaction to fire tests for products - Non-combustibility test   

v. 
vi.  EN-ISO 1716: Reaction to fire tests for products - Determination of the gross 

heat of combustion (calorific value) 

vii.  BS 476 Part 6: Fire Tests on Building materials and structures; method of test 

for fire propagation for products 

viii.  UL 1975, Standard for Fire Tests for Foamed Plastics Used for Decorative Pur-

poses. 

ix.  BS EN 15102, Decorative wall coverings.  Roll and panel form.  
x.  BS 5438, Methods of test for flammability of vertically oriented textile fabrics 

and fabric assemblies subjected to a small igniting flame. 

xi.  BS 5867-2, Fabrics for curtains, drapes and window blinds.  Flammability re-

quirements. Specification. 

xii.  BS EN ISO 6940, Textile fabrics.  Burning behaviour.  Determination of ease of 

ignition of vertically oriented specimens. 

xiii.  BS EN ISO 6941, Textile fabrics.  Burning behaviour.  Measurement of flame 

spread properties of vertically oriented specimens. 

xiv.  BS EN 1624, Textile and textile products.  Burning behaviour of industry and 
technical textiles.  Procedure to determine the flame spread of vertically ori-
ented specimens.  

xv.  BS EN 1625, Textile and textile products.  Burning behaviour of industry and 

technical textiles.  Procedure to determine the ignitability of vertically oriented 
specimens.  

 

7.1.13.  Carpets and Textile floor finish is acceptable with any of the following 

 
i 

ii. 

ASTM D 2859, Standard Test Method for Ignition Characteristics of Finished 
Textile Floor Covering Materials. 
EN  13823: Reaction to fire tests for building products - Building products ex-
cluding floorings exposed to the thermal attack by a single burning item. 

iii.  EN-ISO 11925-2: Reaction to fire tests - Ignitability of products subjected to 

direct impingement of flame - Part 2: Single-flame source test. 

iv.  EN-ISO 1182: Reaction to fire tests for products - Non-combustibility test   
v. 

EN-ISO 1716: Reaction to fire tests for products - Determination of the gross 
heat of combustion (calorific value) 

vi.  EN 13501-1: Fire classification of construction products and building elements - 

Part 1: Classification using data from reaction to fire tests. 

vii.  ASTM E648, Standard test method for critical radiant flux of floor covering sys-

tems using a radiant heat source 

viii.  EN-ISO 9239-1: Reaction to fire tests for floorings - Part 1: Determination of 

the burning behaviour using a radiant heat source. 

ix.  NFPA 253, Standard method of test for critical radiant flux of floor covering 

systems using a radiant heat energy source.  

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 348 of 1348viii.  EN ISO 9239-1 Reaction to fire tests for floorings -- Part 1: Determination of the 

burning behaviour using a radiant heat source. 

ix.  BS 4790, Method for determination of the effects of a small source of ignition 

on textile floor coverings (hot metal nut method). 

x.  BS 4841-6, Rigid polyisocyanurate (PIR) and polyurethane (PUR) products for 

building and end-use applications.  Specification for laminated boards with au-
to-adhesively or separately bonded facings for use as thermal insulation for 
floors. 

xi.  BS 6307, Method of determination of the effects of a small source of ignition 

on textile floor coverings (methenamine tablet test). 

xii.  EN 1365-2, Fire resistance tests for loadbearing elements.  Floors and roofs. 
xiii.  EN 1366-6, Fire resistance tests for service installations.  Raised access and hol-

low core floors. 

xiv.  EN 1399, Resilient floor coverings.  Determination of resistance to stubbed and 

burning cigarettes. 

xv.  ULc - S102.2,  Surface Burning Characteristics of Flooring, Floor Covering and 

Miscellaneous Materials and Assemblies. 

7.1.14.  Kiosks shall be acceptable with any of the following 

i. 

ii. 

Particleboard conforming to Type PBU of ANSI A208.1., not less than 6.4 mm 
thick. 
Foamed plastics having a maximum heat release rate not greater than 100 kW 
when tested in accordance with UL1975 or in accordance with NFPA289, 
Standard Method of Fire Test for Individual Fuel Packages, using the 20 kW 
ignition source. 

iii.  Textile confirming to NFPA 701, Standard Methods of Fire Tests for Flame 

Propagation of Textiles and Films or Chapter 1, section 7.1.10.  

iv.  Metal Composite Panels confirming to Chapter 1, Section 7.1.24.  
v.  BS EN 16755, Durability of reaction to fire performance.  Classes of fire-

retardant treated wood products in interior and exterior use applications. 

 

7.1.15.  Egress Path Marking  

i.  ANSI/UL 1994, Standard for Luminous Egress Path Marking Systems. 
 

7.1.16.  Exhibit booth is acceptable with any of the following 
 

i.  NFPA 703, Standard for Fire Retardant–Treated Wood and Fire-Retardant 

Coatings for Building Materials. 

ii.  NFPA 701, Standard Methods of Fire Tests for Flame Propagation of Textiles and 

Films. 

iii.  NFPA 289, Standard Method of Fire Test for Individual Fuel Packages, using the 

20 kW ignition source 

 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 349 of 13487.1.17.  Mattresses  
 

i.  16 CFR 1632, “Standard for the Flammability of Mattresses and Mattress Pads” 
ii.  650°F (343°C) or greater when tested in accordance with ASTM D 1929, Stand-

ard Test Method for Determining Ignition Temperatures of Plastic. 

iii.  Class B, ASTM E 84, Standard Test Method for Surface Burning Characteristics of 

Building Materials, or ANSI/UL 723, Standard for Test for Surface Burning Char-
acteristics of Building Materials. 

iv.  BS 6807, Methods of test for the ignitability of mattresses with primary and sec-

ondary sources of ignition. 

v.  BS 6807, Methods of test for assessment of ignitability of mattresses, uphol-

stered divans and upholstered bed bases with flaming types of primary and sec-
ondary sources of ignition. 

vi.  BS 7175, Methods of test for the ignitability of bedcovers and pillows by smoul-

dering and flaming ignition sources. 

vii.  BS 7177, Specification for resistance to ignition of mattresses, mattress pads, 

divans and bed bases. 

viii. BS EN ISO 12952-1, Textiles.  Assessment of the ignitability of bedding items.  

Ignition source.  Smouldering cigarette. 

ix.  BS EN ISO 12952-2, Textiles. Assessment of the ignitability of bedding items.  

Ignition source.  Match-flame equivalent. 

x.  BS EN 579-1, Furniture.  Assessment of the ignitability of mattresses and uphol-

stered bed bases.  Ignition source: smouldering cigarette. 

xi.  BS EN 579-2, Furniture.  Assessment of the ignitability of mattresses and uphol-

stered bed bases.  Ignition source: match flame equivalent. 

xii.  EN 13501-1: Fire classification of construction products and building elements - 

Part 1: Classification using data from reaction to fire tests. 

xiii. ASTM E1590, Standard test method for fire testing mattresses. 
 

7.1.18.  Elevators 
 

i.  ASME A17.1/CSA B44, Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators.  
ii.  BS 5655-6, Lifts and service lifts.  Code of practice for the selection, installation 

and location of new lifts. 

iii.  PD ISO/TR 25743:2010 - Lifts (elevators).  Study of the use of lifts for evacuation 

during emergency. 

 
7.1.19.  Exit Signs 
 

BS 5499-4, Safety signs.  Code of practice for escape route signing. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 350 of 1348Chapter 4 
FIRE EXTINGUISHERS 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 351 of 1348In this Chapter:
 Definition of various types of fire extinguishers. 

 Classes of fires and applicable categories of fire extinguishers.

 Inspection and maintenance of fire extinguishers.
 

Intent of the Chapter: 

• 
• 

• 

To familiarize end users of various types of fire extinguishers. 
To enable designers and owners to choose extinguishers appropriately according to 
the hazard.. 
To regulate the inspection and maintenance of fire extinguishers. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 352 of 1348 

In this Chapter : 

Intent of the Chapter 

  To familiarize end users of various types of  Fire  

Extinguishers. 

  To enable designers and owners to Choose extinguishers 

appropriately according to the hazard. 

  To regulate the inspection and maintenance of Fire 

Extinguishers. 

  Definition of various types of 

fire extinguishers 

  Classes of Fires and applicable 
categories of fire extinguishers 

  Inspection and maintenance of 

fire extinguishers 

 

1. Definitions 

1.1. General 

It is a mandatory requirement from Civil Defence. 

1.1.1.  Shall  
 
 
1.1.2.  Should 
 
 
1.1.3.  Listed 
 
 
1.1.4.  Gallon. U.S. Standard and Kilogram  
 

 
1.1.5.  Kilogram  
 

1 Kg = 2.20.lb (Pounds) 

 

It is a suggested requirement recommended by Civil Defence but not mandatory. 

Approved and registered by individual Emirates’ Civil Defence material department. 

1 U.S. gal = 3.785 L., 1 Kg = 1.8 Liter, Approx. (Units used in this chapter are either Kil-
ograms or US Gallons. Conversion of Liter to Kg without  knowing specific density, 
Liter conversion to Kg is approximate.) 

 

 
 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 353 of 1348 

 

1.2. Fire Extinguishers 

 
1.2.1.  Class A Fire  
 

Fires in ordinary combustible materials, such as wood, cloth, paper, rubber, and many 
plastics. 

 
1.2.2.  Class B Fire  
 

Fires in flammable liquids, combustible liquids, petroleum greases, tars, oils, oil-based 
paints, solvents, lacquers, alcohols, and flammable gases. 

Fires that involve energized electrical equipment. 

 
1.2.3.  Class C Fire  
 
 
1.2.4.  Class D Fire  
 

Fires in combustible metals, such as magnesium, titanium, zirconium, sodium, lithium, 
and potassium. 

 
1.2.5.  Class K Fire  
 

Fires in cooking appliances that involve combustible cooking media (vegetable or ani-
mal oils and fats). 

 
1.2.6.  Light (Low) Hazard  
 

Light hazard occupancies are locations where the total amount of Class A combustible 
materials, including furnishings, decorations, and contents, is of minor quantity. This 
can include some buildings or rooms occupied as offices, classrooms, churches, as-
sembly halls, guest room areas of hotels/motels, and so forth. This classification antic-
ipates that the majority of content items are either noncombustible or so arranged 
that a fire is not likely to spread rapidly. Small amounts of Class B flammables used for 
duplicating machines, art departments, and so forth, are included, provided that they 
are kept in closed containers and safely stored. 

 
1.2.7.  Ordinary (Moderate) Hazard  
 

Ordinary hazard occupancies are locations where the total amount of Class A combus-
tibles and Class B flammables are present in greater amounts than expected under 
light (low) hazard occupancies. These occupancies could consist of dining areas, mer-
cantile shops and allied storage, light manufacturing, research operations, auto show-
rooms, parking garages, workshop or support service areas, and warehouses contain-
ing Class I or Class II commodities as defined Chapter 9. Fire Fighting Systems, Defini-
tions. 

 
1.2.8.  Extra (High) Hazard  
 

Extra hazard occupancies are locations where the total amount of Class A combusti-
bles and Class B flammables present, in storage, production, use, finished product, or 
combination thereof, is over and above those expected in occupancies classed as or-
dinary (moderate) hazard. These occupancies could consist of woodworking; vehicle 
repair; aircraft and boat servicing; cooking areas; individual product display show-
rooms; product convention center displays; and storage and manufacturing processes 
such as painting, dipping, and coating, including flammable liquid handling. Also in-
cluded is warehousing of or in-process storage of other than Class I and Class II com-
modities. 

 

 
 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 354 of 13481.2. Fire Extinguishers 

 
1.2.9.  Carbon Dioxide 
 

A colorless, odorless, electrically nonconductive inert gas that is a suitable medium 
for extinguishing Class B and Class C fires. 

 
1.2.10.  Dry Chemical  
 

A mixture of finely divided solid particles, usually sodium bicarbonate-, potassium 
bicarbonate-, or ammonium phosphate–based with added particulate material sup-
plemented by special treatment to provide resistance to packing, and moisture ab-
sorption (caking), and to promote proper flow characteristics. 

 
1.2.11.  Wet Chemical  
 

Wet chemicals include, but are not limited to, solutions of water and potassium ac-
etate, potassium carbonate, potassium citrate, or any combinations thereof 

 
1.2.12.  Dry Powder 
 

Solid materials in powder or granular form designed to extinguish Class D combus-
tible metal fires by crusting, smothering, or heat-transferring means. 

 
1.2.13.  Film Forming Foam 
 

The film-forming foam agents referenced in this standard are AFFF (aqueous film-
forming foam) and FFFP (film-forming fluoroprotein foam). 

 
1.2.14.  Halocarbon Agents  
 

Halocarbon agents include hydrochlorofluorocarbon (HCFC), hydrofluorocarbon 
(HFC), perfluorocarbon (PFC), and fluoroiodocarbon (FIC) types of agents. 

 
1.2.15.  High Pressure Cylinder  
 

For the purposes of this standard, high-pressure cylinders (and cartridges) are those 
containing nitrogen, compressed air, carbon dioxide, or other gases at a pressure 
higher than 500 psi (3447 kPa) at 70°F (21°C). 

 
1.2.16.  Low Pressure Cylinder 
 

For the purposes of this standard, low-pressure cylinders are those containing fire 
extinguishing agent (medium), nitrogen, compressed air, or other compressed gases 
at a service pressure of 500 psi (3447 kPa) or lower at 70°F (21°C). 

 
1.2.17.  Portable Fire Extinguisher  
 

Portable fire extinguishers are intended as a first line of defense to cope with fires 
of limited size. They are needed even if the property is equipped with automatic 
sprinklers, standpipe and hose, or other fixed protection equipment. 

 
1.2.18.  Extinguisher Service Pressure 
 

The normal operating pressure as indicated on the nameplate or cylinder of a fire 
extinguisher. 

 
1.2.19.  Factory Test Pressure 
 

The pressure at which a shell was tested at time of manufacture. This pressure is 
shown on the nameplate. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 355 of 13481.2. Fire Extinguishers 

 
1.2.20.  Recharging 
 

The replacement of the extinguishing agent (also includes the expellant for certain 
types of fire extinguishers). 

 
1.2.21.  Servicing  
 

Includes one or more of the following: (a) maintenance, (b) recharging, (c) hydro-
static testing. 

 
1.2.22.  Cartridge Operated Fire Extinguisher 
 

A fire extinguisher in which the expellant gas is in a separate container from the 
agent storage container. 

 
1.2.23.  Non-rechargeable Extinguisher 
 

A nonrechargeable (nonrefillable) fire extinguisher is not capable of (nor intended 
to be capable of) undergoing complete maintenance, hydrostatic testing, and being 
restored to its full operating capability by the standard practices used by fire equip-
ment dealers and distributors. 

 
1.2.24.  Portable Fire Extinguisher  
 

A portable device, carried or on wheels and operated by hand, containing an extin-
guishing agent that can be expelled under pressure for the purpose of suppressing 
or extinguishing fire. 

 
1.2.25.  Rechargeable Extinguisher 
 

A rechargeable (refillable) fire extinguisher is capable of undergoing complete 
maintenance, including internal inspection of the pressure vessel, replacement of 
all substandard parts and seals, and hydrostatic testing. 

 
1.2.26.  General Use Residential Extinguisher 
 

A fire extinguisher that has been  specifically investigated, tested, and listed for use 
only in and around the home (one- and two-family dwellings and living units within 
multifamily structures) for the purpose of suppressing or extinguishing a fire. 

 
1.2.27.  Self Expellant Fire Extinguisher  
 

A fire extinguisher in which the agents have sufficient vapor pressure at normal op-
erating temperatures to expel themselves 

 
1.2.28.  Wheeled Type Extinguisher 
 

A portable fire extinguisher equipped with a carriage and wheels intended to be 
transported to the fire by one person. 

 
 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 356 of 1348 

2.  Fire Extinguishers 

 

2.1. Intention 

2.1.1.  Portable Fire Extinguishers are the best available first response to tackle the fire at 
its incipient stage. The intention of this chapter is to provide a guideline about the 
types of extinguishers applicable to various natures of fires. 

 
2.1.2.  However, usage of fire extinguishers shall be limited to informed and trained person-
nel. Any fire can grow into catastrophe within minutes. It is not the intention of Civil 
Defence nor recommendation for people to stay within fire vicinity to fight fires with 
portable extinguishers, unless the fire is manageable scale and person using the ex-
tinguisher is trained. 

 

2.2. Basic Awareness 

2.2.1.  The following are the basic steps necessary to put a 

fire extinguisher into operation:                                                                           
a. Recognition of equipment as a fire extinguisher                                                                       
b. Selection and suitability of a fire extinguisher                                                                      
c. Transport of a fire extinguisher to the fire                                                                                   
d. Actuation of the fire extinguisher                                  
e. Application of the extinguishing agent to the fire 

extinguisher was       

The modern fire       

Did You Know? 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
2.2.2.  When a fire extinguisher is being selected, the fol-
lowing physical conditions should be considered.  

2.2.2.1.  Gross Weight. In the selection of a fire 
extinguisher, the physical ability of the 
user should be contemplated. When the 
hazard exceeds the capability of a hand 
portable fire extinguisher, wheeled fire 
extinguishers or fixed systems should be 
considered. 

invented by British 

Captain George       

William Manby in 1818. 

It consisted of a      

copper vessel of 3  

gallons (13.6  liters) of 

pearl ash (potassium 

carbonate) solution 

contained within        

compressed air. 

                                
 
                      
  2.2.2.2. Corrosion. In some fire extinguisher installations, there exists a possibility 
of exposing the fire extinguisher to a corrosive atmosphere. Where this is 
the case, consideration should be given to providing the fire extinguishers 
so exposed with proper protection or providing fire extinguishers that have 
been found suitable for use in these conditions. 

 
  2.2.2.3. Agent Reaction. The possibility of adverse reactions, contamination, or oth-

er effects of an extinguishing agent on either manufacturing processes or 
on equipment or both, should be considered in the selection of a fire extin-
guisher. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 357 of 1348                                                     
  2.2.2.4. Wheeled Units. Where wheeled fire extinguishers are used, consideration 

should be given to the mobility of the fire extinguisher within the area in 
which it will be used. For outdoor locations, the use of proper rubber-tired 
or wide-rimmed wheel designs should be considered according to terrain. 
For indoor locations, the size of doorways and passages should be large 
enough to permit ready passage of the fire extinguisher. 

 
  2.2.2.5. Wind and Draft. If the hazard is subject to winds or draft, the use of fire 

extinguishers and agents having sufficient range to overcome these condi-
tions should be considered. 

 
  2.2.2.6. Availability of Personnel. Consideration should be given to the number of 
persons available to operate the fire extinguishers, the degree of training 
provided, and the physical capability of the operators. 

 

2.2.3.  Extinguishers should be kept near a door that can be used as an escape route. 
 
2.2.4.  Stay low. Avoid breathing the heated smoke, vapors, or fumes as much as possible, 

as well as the extinguishing agents. 

 
2.2.5. 

If you feel confident in attacking the fire, use the appropriate fire-fighting equip-
ment. If the fire is not extinguished quickly, get out of the building, closing door(s) 
behind you, and do not re-enter until the facility management handles the incident 
and Civil Defence personnel evaluate the situation. 

 
2.2.6.  A fire creates conditions of stress and intense excitement. Under these conditions, 
the choice of a correct fire extinguisher needs to be made quickly. The protection 
planner/Facility Management/Authorized First Responder can help to ensure selec-
tion of the correct fire extinguisher by using the following procedures:                              
a. Locating the fire extinguisher near fire hazards for which they are suitable.            
b. Using fire extinguishers suitable for more than one class of fire                                  
c. Marking clearly the intended use.                                                                                       
d. Training employees in the use of proper fire extinguishers. 

 
2.2.7.  The use of conspicuous markings to readily identify a fire extinguisher’s suitability is 

particularly important where fire extinguishers are grouped or where multiple fire 
hazards are present in an area. 

 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 358 of 13482.2.8. Obsolete Extinguishers 
 

2.2.8.1.   The following types of extinguishers are considered obsolete and should 

be removed from service and replaced:                                                                                                                     
a. Soda acid types                                                                                                                                 
b. Chemical foam (excluding film-forming agents)                                                                       
c. Vaporizing liquid                                                                                                                                 
d. Cartridge-operated water                                                                                                                
e. Cartridge-operated loaded stream                                                                                                         
f. Copper or brass shell fire extinguishers (excluding pump tanks) joined 
by soft solder or rivets                                                                                                                                               
g. Extinguishers rated prior to 1955 and marked B-1,C-1 on the name-
plate                                                                                                                                        
h. Fire extinguishers not listed or labeled 
i. Halon 1211 and Halon 1301 Agents 

 
 
                                                     

2.2.9. Training 
 

2.2.9.1.   At least 10 % of the Security personnel, Occupants, Employees and Su-

pervisory personnel of each occupancy shall be trained on basic fire 
awareness, types, use and operation of fire extinguishers in emergency 
situation. 

2.2.9.2.   The training shall be conducted by an authorized agency by the Civil De-

fence or by the Civil Defence department personnel. 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 359 of 1348 

2.3. General Requirements  

2.3.1.  The General requirements of Fire Extinguisher shall be as per Table 4.1. 
 

 

Table 4.1: General Requirements of Fire Extinguishers 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  EXTINGUISHER 

RATING 

2.  EXTINGUISHER 
CLASSIFICATION 

AS PER THE TEST LABORATORIES FOLLOWING ARE THE RATING CRITERIA 
 
i.  Class A Rating. Tested on Wood 
ii.  Class B Rating. Tested on 5.1 cm depth n-heptane fires in square pans. 
iii. Class C Rating. No fire test. Agent must be a nonconductor of electricity 
iv. Class D Rating. Special tests on specific combustible metal fires 
v.  Class K Rating. Special tests on cooking appliances using combustible cooking 

media (vegetable or animal oils and fats) 

i.  The classification of fire extinguishers shall consist of a letter that indicates the 

class of fire on which a fire extinguisher has been found to be effective, pre-
ceded by a rating number (Class A and Class B only) that indicates the relative 
extinguishing effectiveness. 

ii.  Fire extinguishers classified for use on Class C, Class D, or Class K hazards shall 

not be required to have a number preceding the classification letter. 

iii.  Class A: The Fires involving ordinary combustible solid materials such as wood, 

cloth, paper, rubber, and many other plastics. 

iv.  Class B: The Fires involving flammable liquids, combustible liquids, all petrole-

um based products, solvents, paints, chemicals and flammable gases. 

v.  Class C:The Fires involving energized electrical equipment due to ignition of 

electrical nature. 

vi.  Class D: The Fires involving combustible metals, such as magnesium, titanium, 

zirconium, sodium, lithium, and potassium. 

vii.  Class K: The Fires involving cooking appliances due to combustible cooking 

media such as vegetable oils and animal fats etc.  

 
1.  LABELING 
 
i.  An extinguisher labeling for example (UL Listed), “2-A:10-B:C” conveys the 

following information.                                                                                                        
a. Extinguisher is capable of extinguishing Class A fire with equivalency of 2.5 
gallons of water (Number 1=1.25 Gal of water, number 2=2.5 Gal of water, 
number 3=3.25 Gal of water etc.)                                                                                  
b. Extinguisher is capable of extinguishing class B fire with a capacity of 10 ft2 
of coverage. (Number against B implies square foot coverage of extinguisher 
for class B fires)                                                                                                                 
c. Extinguisher is also applicable to Class C fires and is non conductive (Usually 
there are no numbers against C) 

 
 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 360 of 1348 

Table 4.1: General Requirements of Fire Extinguishers 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

3. PLANNING 

Area and arrangement of the building occupancy conditions 
Severity of the hazard 

THE FOLLOWING ITEMS SHOULD BE EVALUATED BEFORE SELECTING,  INSTALLA-
TION AND DISTRIBUTING PORTABLE FIRE EXTINGUISHERS IN A BUILDING: 
 
i. 
ii. 
iii.  Anticipated classes of fire 
iv.  Other protective systems or devices 
v.  Distances to be traveled to reach fire extinguishers 
vi.  Anticipated rate of fire spread 
vii. 
viii.  Smoke contributed by the burning materials 
ix.  Accessibility of a fire to close approach with portable fire extinguishers 

Intensity and rate of heat development 

4.  INSTALLATION  i. 

ii. 

Portable fire extinguishers shall be maintained in a fully charged and operable 
condition and shall be kept in their designated places at all times when they are 
not being used. 
Fire extinguishers shall be conspicuously located where they will be readily ac-
cessible and immediately available in the event of fire. Preferably, they shall be 
located along normal paths of travel, including exits from areas. 

iii.  Before installing any fire-extinguishing equipment, read and understand the 

installation and use instructions, including the limitations, cautions, and warn-
ings contained on the equipment and in the owner’s manual. 

iv.  Portable extinguishers shall be installed in an accessible spot, free from block-

ing by storage and equipment, and near room exits that provide an escape 
route. So that the top of the extinguisher is not more than 1.5 m above the 
floor and not less than 30 cm from the bottom of extinguisher to the finished 
floor. 
The extinguisher should be easy to reach and remove and should be placed 
where it will not be damaged. 

v. 

vi.  Portable extinguishers shall be installed on hangers or in the brackets supplied 

by the manufacturer, mounted in cabinets, or placed on shelves. 

vii.  Extinguishers shall be placed so that the operating instructions on the extin-

guisher face outward. 

viii.  Fire extinguishers shall not be installed / placed in any areas where the temper-

atures outside of the listed temperature range shown on the fire extinguisher 
label. Generally the fire extinguishers are permitted to be installed in the areas 
where temperatures ranging from 40C to 490C. 

ix.  Fire extinguishers cabinets shall not be kept locked in any case with in the facili-
ty. While installation, all the fire extinguishers shall be fully charged and ready 
for use in case of an emergency.  

 

 

Figure 4.1.:  Symbols for Fire Extinguisher Classes 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 361 of 1348 

 

Table 4.1: General Requirements of Fire Extinguishers 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

5.  SAFETY      

i.  Most fires produce toxic decomposition products of combustion, and some 

materials can produce highly toxic gases. Fires can also consume available oxy-
gen or produce dangerously high exposure to convected or radiated heat. All of 
these can affect the degree to which a fire can be safely approached with extin-
guishing equipment. 

ii.  Discharging portable fire extinguishers from too close a distance on cooking 

grease fires can cause splashing of the burning grease or oil and spread the fire. 
The recommended distance for operating portable fire extinguishers is shown 
on the label. 

iii.  Portable fire extinguishers should not be installed adjacent to the location of a 

potential fire hazard but should be accessible to the hazard. 

iv.  Halogenated agent extinguisher labels contain information such as the mini-

mum volume of room that can be properly and safely protected.  

v.  When using these extinguishers, avoid breathing the discharged agent or the 

gases produced by the thermal decomposition of the agent.  

vi.  Evacuate and ventilate the area immediately after use.  
vii.  Carbon dioxide fire extinguishers contain an extinguishing agent that will not 
support life when used in sufficient concentration to extinguish a fire. The use 
of a carbon dioxide extinguisher(s) in an unventilated space can dilute the oxy-
gen supply. Prolonged occupancy of such spaces can result in loss of conscious-
ness due to oxygen deficiency.  

viii.  Extinguishers not classified for Class C hazards present a shock hazard if used 

on fires involving energized electrical equipment. 

ix.  Dry chemical extinguishers, when used in a small unventilated area, can reduce 

x. 

visibility for a period of up to several minutes. 
For confined spaces, prominent caution labels on the fire extinguisher, warning 
signs at entry points, provision for remote application, extra-long-range fire 
extinguisher nozzles, special ventilation, provision of breathing apparatus and 
other personal protective equipment, and adequate training of personnel are 
among the measures that should be considered. 

1.  GENERAL 
 
i. 

Persons who are expected to use a fire extinguisher should be made familiar 
with all information contained in the manufacturer’s nameplate(s) and the in-
struction manual.  

ii.  Proper operation of a fire extinguisher requires the operator to execute several 

basic steps in a certain sequence. The fire extinguisher designer, the approval 
agencies, the installer, and the protection planner can influence significantly 
the ease and likelihood of these steps being accomplished properly.  

iii.  Where employees have not been trained, operation of fire extinguishers could 

be seriously delayed, the extinguishing material could be wasted due to poor 
application techniques, and more fire extinguishers could have to be used, or 
the fire could possibly not be extinguished. 

PRECAUTIONS 

6. OPERATION 

AND USE 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 362 of 1348 

 

 

ITEMS 

6. OPERATION 

AND USE 

 

Table 4.1: General Requirements of Fire Extinguishers 

REQUIREMENTS 

2.  RECOGNITION OF EQUIPMENT AS AN EXTINGUISHER 
 
i. 

Permanent marking on the front of fire extinguishers shall be present, indi-
cating their purpose, content and usage. 

ii.  Additional signage, not a part of the device, shall be provided to indicate the 

location of a fire extinguisher. These preferably should be standardized 
throughout the property so that all fire extinguishers are easily “spotted.” The-
se markings could be in the form of electric lights, placards, mounting boards, 
overhead signs, color panels or stripes, or cabinets.  
If fire extinguishers are located along the normal exit paths from an area, per-
sonnel are more inclined to take them and return to the site of a fire. 

iii. 

 
3.  TRANSPORT OF A FIRE EXTINGUISHER TO THE FIRE 
 
i. 

A fire extinguisher should be mounted and located so it can be easily removed 
in a fire emergency and brought to the site of the fire as quickly as possible. It 
should be readily accessible without need for moving or climbing over stock, 
materials or equipment. 

ii.  Quick transport of an extinguisher depends on several factors such as weight of 

the extinguisher, travel distance to fire location, using stairs, using gloves, con-
gestion of premises, physical ability of the user. Preplanning shall address all 
these issues to successful and efficient use of fire extinguishers. 
In the case of wheeled fire extinguishers, the width of aisles and doorways and 
the nature of the flooring and outside grounds over which the fire extinguisher 
needs to be moved should be taken into account. 

iii. 

 
4.  ACTUATION OF FIRE EXTINGUISHER 
 
i.  Once the fire extinguisher has been transported to the fire site, it should be 
placed into operation without delay. Employees should be familiar with any 
steps needed to actuate any fire extinguisher. Here is where previous training is 
most valuable, since there is little time to stop and read operating instructions 
on the nameplate. 

ii.  Position for Operation. The intended position for operation is usually marked 

on the fire extinguisher. When the position of operation is obvious (such as 
when one hand holds the fire extinguisher and the other hand holds the noz-
zle), this information can be omitted. 

iii.  Removal of Restraining or Locking Devices. Many fire extinguishers have an 
operation safeguard or locking device that prevents accidental actuation. The 
most common device is a lock pin or ring pin that needs to be withdrawn before 
operation. 

iv.  Start of Discharge. This requires one or more of several actions such as 

turning or squeezing a valve handle or lever, pushing a lever, or pumping. 

v.  Agent Application. This act involves direction of the stream of extinguishing 
agent onto the fire. Nameplate information has advisory notes regarding the 
application of the agent to different types of fires. 

vi.  Remember the “PASS” word. 
 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 363 of 1348 

 

 

 

Figure 4.2.:  Fire Extinguisher Signage for various locations 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 364 of 1348 

2.4. Types of Fire Extinguishers  

2.4.1.  The Selection of Fire Extinguishers shall be based on Table 4.2. 
 

 

Table 4.2: Types and Selection of Fire Extinguishers 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  WATER TYPE 

1. DESCRIPTION 
 
i.  The most popular type is the 2½ gal (9.46 L) stored-pressure water fire extin-
guisher. These fire extinguishers are being used to replace inverting types of 
water fire extinguishers (soda acid and cartridge-operated water) that are no 
longer manufactured. An important advantage of the stored-pressure water 
type, as opposed to inverting types, is its ability to be discharged intermittent-
ly. Some models are suitable for use at freezing conditions when charged as 
specified on the nameplate.  

ii.  This includes water, antifreeze, wetting agent, and loaded stream fire extin-
guishers. These fire extinguishers are intended primarily for use on Class A 
fires. The stream initially should be directed at the base of the flames. After 
extinguishment of flames, it should be directed generally at smoldering or 
glowing surfaces. Application should begin as close as possible to the fire. Deep
-seated fires should be thoroughly soaked and might need to be “broken apart” 
to effect complete extinguishment. 

 
2. APPLICATION 
 
i.  Class A fires., Wood, Paper, Textile, Garbage, Furniture, Residential Plastic, In-

terior décor. 

 
3. NOT SUITABLE FOR  
 
i.  Class B fires., Flammable Liquids. 
ii.  Class C fires., Electrical equipment, Office equipment, Computers. 
iii. Class K Fires., Cooking fires, Kitchen, grease, oil fires. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 365 of 1348 

 

Table 4.2: Types and Selection of Fire Extinguishers 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

2.  FOAM TYPE  1. DESCRIPTION 

 
i.  AFFF (aqueous film-forming foam) and FFFP (film-forming fluoroprotein)-type fire 
extinguishers are rated for use on both Class A and Class B fires. They are not suita-
ble for use in freezing temperatures. An advantage of this type of extinguisher when 
used on Class B flammable liquid fires of appreciable depth is the ability of the 
agent to float on and secure the liquid surface, which helps to prevent reignition.  

ii.  Fire extinguishers of these types are usually available in hand portable models of 1.6 
gal (6 L) and 2½ gal (9.46 L) and in wheeled models having a liquid capacity of 33 gal 
(125 L). These fire extinguishers have ratings of 2-A:10-B, 3-A:20-B, and 20-A:160-B, 
respectively. 

iii.  The extinguishing agent is a solution of film-forming surfactant in water that forms 

mechanical foam when discharged through an aspirating nozzle. On Class A fires, 
the agent acts as both a coolant and penetrant to reduce temperatures to below 
the ignition level. On Class B fires, the agent acts as a barrier to exclude air or oxy-
gen from the fuel surface. 

iv. On flammable liquid fires of appreciable depth, best results are obtained when the 
discharge from the fire extinguisher is played against the inside of the back wall of 
the vat or tank just above the burning surface to permit the natural spread of the 
agent back over the burning liquid. If this cannot be done, the operator should 
stand far enough away from the fire to allow the agent to fall lightly upon the burn-
ing surface — the stream should not be directed into the burning liquid. Where pos-
sible, the operator should walk around the fire while directing the stream to get 
maximum coverage during the discharge period.  

v.  For fires in ordinary combustible materials, the agent can be used to coat the burn-
ing surface directly. For flammable-liquid spill fires, the agent could be flowed over 
a burning surface by bouncing it off the floor just in front of the burning area. 

vi. Film-forming foam agents are not effective on flammable liquids and gases escaping 

under pressure or cooking-grease fires. 

 
2. APPLICATION 
 
i.  Class A fires., Wood, Paper, Textile, Garbage, Furniture, Residential Plastic, Interior 

décor. 

ii.  Class B fires., Flammable Liquids. 
 
3. NOT SUITABLE FOR  
 
i.  Class C fires., Electrical equipment, Office equipment, Computers. 
ii.  Below 40C ambient temperatures 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 366 of 1348 

 

Table 4.2: Types and Selection of Fire Extinguishers 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. CARBON DIOXIDE (CO2) 
 
i.  The principal advantage of CO2 (carbon dioxide) fire extinguishers is that the 

agent does not leave a residue after use. This can be a significant factor where 
protection is needed for delicate and costly electronic equipment.  

ii.  Carbon dioxide extinguishers are listed for use on a Class B and Class C fire. 

Since the agent is discharged in the form of a gas/snow cloud, it has a relatively 
short range of 3 ft. to 8 ft. (1 m to 2.4 m).  

iii. Thus, initial application needs to start reasonably close to the fire. On all fires, 

the discharge should be directed at the base of the flames. The discharge 
should be applied to the burning surface even after the flames are extinguished 
to allow added time for cooling and to prevent possible reflash. 

iv. The most commonly used method of agent application on contained flamma-
ble liquid fires is to start at the near edge and direct the discharge in a slow, 
side-to-side sweeping motion, gradually progressing toward the back of the 
fire. The other method is called overhead application. The discharge horn is 
directed in a dagger or downward position (at an angle of about 45 degrees) 
toward the center of the burning area. Generally, the horn is not moved, as in 
the other method, because the discharge stream enters the fire from above 
and spreads out in all directions over the burning surface. For spill fires, the 
side-to-side sweeping motion could give better.  

v.  On fires involving electrical equipment, discharge should be directed at the 

source of  the flames. It is important to de-energize the equipment as soon as 
possible to eliminate the potential of reignition. These agents are not suitable 
for use on pressurized fuel fires or cooking-grease fires. 

 
2. APPLICATION 
 
i.  Class C fires., Electric equipment, office equipment, computers, printing ma-

chines, copy machines. 

ii.  Class B fires., Flammable Liquids. 
 
3. NOT SUITABLE FOR  
 
i.  Water soluble flammable liquids such as alcohol, acetone, esters, ketones. 

3.  CO2 TYPE 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 367 of 1348 

 

Table 4.2: Types and Selection of Fire Extinguishers 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  DRY POWDER (MULTI PURPOSE) 
 
i.  Fire extinguishers of this type contain an ammonium phosphate base agent. 

Hand fire extinguishers are available with fire extinguishment ratings of 1-A to 
20-A and 10-B:C to 120-B:C and wheeled models with fire extinguishment 
ratings of 20-A to 40-A and 60-B:C to 320-B:C.  

ii.  Multipurpose agents are used in exactly the same manner as ordinary dry 
chemical agents on Class B fires. For use on Class A fires, the multipurpose 
agent has the additional characteristic of softening and sticking when in con-
tact with hot surfaces. In this way, it can adhere to burning materials and form 
a coating that will smother and isolate the fuel from air.  

iii. When applying the agent, it is important to try to coat all burning areas in or-
der to eliminate or minimize the number of small embers that could be a po-
tential source of reignition. The agent itself has little cooling effect and, be-
cause of its surface coating characteristic, it cannot penetrate below the burn-
ing surface. For this reason, extinguishment of deep-seated fires could possibly 
not be accomplished unless the agent is discharged below the surface or the 
material is broken apart and spread out. 

iv. Fire extinguishers with a Class B rating can extinguish a fire involving combus-

tible cooking media (vegetable or animal oils and fats).  

v.  Only fire extinguishers having a Class K rating are recommended for use on 

cooking-grease fires. 

 
2. APPLICATION 
 
i.  Class A fires., Wood, Paper, Textile, Garbage, Furniture, Residential Plastic, In-

terior décor. 

ii.  Class B fires., Flammable Liquids. 
iii. Class C fires., Electric equipment, office equipment, computers, printing ma-

chines, copy machines. 

iv. Class D fires., Metal fires involving magnesium, titanium, zirconium, sodium, 

lithium, and potassium. 

 
3. NOT SUITABLE FOR  
 
i.  Though it is multipurpose, Class rating should be strictly followed. 

4.  DRY POWDER 

TYPE 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 368 of 1348 

 

Table 4.2: Types and Selection of Fire Extinguishers 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  DRY CHEMICAL 
 
i. 

Due to the different designs and the various types of dry chemical agents, 
choosing the most suitable dry chemical fire extinguisher requires careful 
evaluation.  

ii.  Hand portable  models have a discharge stream that ranges from 10 ft. to 30 

ft. (3 m to 9 m), depending on fire extinguisher size. Compared with carbon 
dioxide or halogenated agent fire extinguishers, they will also perform better 
under windy conditions. 

iii.  Dry chemical fire extinguishers are available in two basic styles: stored pres-
sure and cartridge-operated. The stored-pressure (rechargeable) type is the 
most widely used and is best suited where infrequent use is anticipated and 
where skilled personnel with professional recharge equipment are available.  
iv.  The cartridge-operated type has the advantage of being quickly refilled in re-

v. 

mote locations without the need for special equipment.  
Some dry chemical models can be equipped with long-range (high-velocity) 
nozzles or applicators that are beneficial in applying the agent under certain 
special fire-fighting conditions. 

vi.  The potassium and urea-potassium base bicarbonate agents are selected in 
preference to sodium bicarbonate, principally because of their greater fire-
extinguishing capabilities. If corrosion is not a factor, potassium chloride can 
also be included in this group.  

vii.  The ammonium phosphate base agent (multipurpose) is the only dry chemical 

agent that is suitable for Class A protection. In addition to Class B and Class C 
protection, the residues of multipurpose dry chemical, when left in contact 
with metal surfaces, can cause corrosion. 

viii.  Where dry chemical fire extinguishers are utilized for Class C protection, it is 

important to consider that the residue of potassium chloride is more corrosive 
than other dry chemicals and that a multipurpose base agent will be more 
difficult to remove because it first softens when in contact with hot surfaces 
and then hardens when it cools.  

ix.  Stored-pressure fire extinguishers are available in capacities from 1 lb to 30 lb 

(0.5 kg to 14 kg) for hand fire extinguishers and 125 kg to 250 lb (57 kg to 
113.5 kg) for wheeled fire extinguishers. Cartridge/cylinder-operated fire ex-
tinguishers are available in capacities from 4 lb to 30 lb (1.8 kg to 14 kg) for 
hand fire extinguishers and 45 lb to 350 lb (20 kg to 159 kg) for wheeled fire 
extinguishers  

 
2. APPLICATION 
 
i.  Class A fires., Wood, Paper, Textile, Garbage, Furniture, Residential Plastic, Inte-

rior décor. 

ii.  Class B fires., Flammable Liquids. 
iii. Class C fires., Electric equipment, office equipment, computers, printing ma-

chines, copy machines. 

iv. Class D fires., Metal fires involving magnesium, titanium, zirconium, sodium, 

lithium, and potassium. 

 
3. NOT SUITABLE FOR  
 
i.  Class rating should be strictly followed. 

6.  DRY CHEMICAL 

TYPE 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 369 of 1348 

 

Table 4.2: Types and Selection of Fire Extinguishers 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

7.  WET CHEMICAL 

TYPE 

1.  WET CHEMICAL 
 
i.  Fire extinguishers of this type are available in hand portable models of 1.5 gal (6 

L) and 2½ gal (9.46 L). The extinguishing agent can be comprised of, but is not 
limited to, solutions of water and potassium acetate, potassium carbonate, po-
tassium citrate, or a combination of the aforementioned chemicals (which are 
conductors of electricity). The liquid agent typically has a pH of 9.0 or less.  

ii.  On Class A fires, the agent works as a coolant. On Class K fires (cooking-oil fires), 
the agent forms a foam blanket to prevent reignition. The water content of the 
agent aids in cooling and reducing the temperature of the hot oils and fats be-
low their autoignition point. The agent, when discharged as a fine spray directly 
at cooking appliances, reduces the possibility of splashing hot grease and does 
not present a shock hazard to the operator. 

iii. In recent years, the development of high-efficiency cooking equipment with 

high-energy input rates and the widespread use of vegetable oils with high au-
toignition temperatures has highlighted the need for a new Class K fire extin-
guisher. The wet chemical extinguisher was the first extinguisher to qualify to 
the new Class K requirements. 

iv.  In addition to offering rapid fire extinguishment, a thick foam blanket is formed 

to prevent reignition while cooling both the appliance and the hot cooking oil. 
Wet chemical extinguishers also offer improved visibility during fire fighting as 
well as minimizing clean-up afterwards. 

 
2. APPLICATION 
 
i.  Class A fires., Wood, Paper, Textile, Garbage, Furniture, Residential Plastic, Inte-

rior décor. 

ii.  Class K fires., Kitchen fires, deep seated cooking, fryer oil fires. 
 
3. NOT SUITABLE FOR  
 
i.  Class rating should be strictly followed. 
ii.  Class B fires., Flammable Liquids. 
iii. Class C fires., Electric equipment, office equipment, computers, printing ma-

chines, copy machines. 

iv. Class D fires., Metal fires involving magnesium, titanium, zirconium, sodium, 

lithium, and potassium. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 370 of 1348 

 

Table 4.2: Types and Selection of Fire Extinguishers 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

8.  HALOCARBON 
       (CLEAN 

AGENT) TYPE 

1.  HALOCARBON (CLEAN AGENT) 
 
i.  Halocarbon agents are similar to halon agents in that they are nonconductive, 

noncorrosive, and evaporate after use, leaving no residue.  

ii.  Larger models of halocarbon fire extinguishers are listed for Class A as well as 

Class B and Class C fires, which makes them quite suitable for use on fires in 
electronic equipment.  

iii.  Compared to carbon dioxide on a weight-of-agent basis, halocarbon agents are 
at least twice as effective. When discharged, the agent is in a combined form of 
a gas/mist with about twice the range of carbon dioxide. To some extent, windy 
conditions or strong air currents could make extinguishing difficult. 

iv. On flammable liquid fires, best results are obtained when the discharge from 
the fire extinguisher is employed to sweep the flame off the burning surface, 
applying the discharge first at the near edge of the fire and gradually progress-
ing toward the back of the fire by moving the discharge nozzle slowly from side 
to side.  

v.  In using fire extinguishers of this type in unventilated places, such as small 

rooms, closets, or confined spaces, operators and other persons should avoid 
breathing the extinguishing agent or the gases produced by thermal decomposi-
tion.  

 
2. APPLICATION 
 
i.  Class A fires., Wood, Paper, Textile, Garbage, Furniture, Residential Plastic, Inte-

rior décor. 

ii.  Class B fires., Flammable Liquids, excluding pressurized fuels 
iii. Class C fires., Electric equipment, office equipment, computers, printing ma-

chines, copy machines 

 
3. NOT SUITABLE FOR  
 
i.  Pressurized fuels. 
ii.  Class K fires., Cooking and grease fires. 
iii. Outdoors and unenclosed spaces. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 371 of 1348 

 

Table 4.2: Types and Selection of Fire Extinguishers 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

9.  WHEELED TYPE  1.  WHEELED TYPE EXTINGUISHER 

 
i.  The selection of any type of wheeled fire extinguisher is generally associated 
with a recognized need to provide additional protection for special hazards or 
large, extra-hazard areas.  

ii.  Where wheeled fire extinguishers are to be installed, consideration should be 

given to mobility within the area in which they will be used. 

iii. For outdoor locations, models with rubber tires or wide-rim wheels will be easi-

er to transport.  

iv. For indoor locations, doorways, aisles, and corridors need to be wide enough to 

permit the ready passage of the fire extinguisher.  

v.  Because of the magnitude of the fire it will generally be used on, this type of fire 
extinguisher should be reserved for use by operators who have actually used the 
equipment, who have received special instructions on the use of the equipment, 
or who have used the equipment in live fire training. 

 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 372 of 1348 

 

2.5. Application of Fire Extinguishers  

2.5.1.  The application of Fire Extinguishers for various hazards shall be as per Table 4.3. 

Table 4.3: Application of Fire Extinguishers 

HAZARD 

AREA 

TYPE OF EXTINGUISHER  DISTRIBUTION 

 
i.  Multi-purpose Dry Pow-

der (ONE) 

2-A, 20-B, C 
4 Kg 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AND 
 
i.  CO2 Type (ONE) 
5 Kg 

i.  Each extinguisher of 

size mentioned serves 
approximately 280 m2 
of the area. 

ii.  Maximum travel dis-

tance to such an extin-
guisher shall not be 
more than 30 m. That is 
from any point of the 
area, there shall be one 
extinguisher within a 
distance of 30 m. 

iii. Extinguishers shall be 
placed along the corri-
dors, waiting areas, 
shops, supermarkets, 
service corridors, staff 
and reception areas 
etc., where people can 
easily find and use 
them during fire acci-
dents. 

iv. As a practice fire extin-
guishers are placed in 
Fire Hose Cabinets in 
UAE. Such cabinets 
shall clearly have sign-
age that indicates pres-
ence of extinguishers 
inside the Fire Hose 
Cabinet (FHC) 

1. ASSEMBLY 
i.  Seating areas 
ii.  Corridors 
iii. Waiting areas 
iv. Exit routes 
 
2. BUSINESS 
i.  Office areas 
ii.  Shops 
iii. Corridors 
iv. Exit routes 
 
3. EDUCATIONAL 
i.  Corridors 
ii.  Reception 
iii. Auditoriums 
iv. Assembly halls 
v.  Locker rooms 
 
4. HEALTHCARE 
i.  Patient rooms 
ii.  Nurse Stations 
iii. Corridors 
iv. Waiting areas 
v.  Exit routes 
 
5. RESIDENTIAL 
i.  Apartments 
ii.  Corridors 
 
6. HOTEL 
i.  Guest Rooms 
ii.  Corridors 
iii. Reception 
iv. Dining areas 
v.  Exit routes 
 
7. DAYCARE 
i.  Corridors 
ii.  Reception 
iii. Exit routes 
 

1.  CLASS A 

FIRES 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 373 of 1348 

 

Table 4.3: Application of Fire Extinguishers 

HAZARD 

AREA 

TYPE OF EXTINGUISHER  DISTRIBUTION 

i.  Each extinguisher of 

size mentioned serves 
approximately 280 m2 
of the area. 

ii.  Maximum travel dis-

tance to such an extin-
guisher shall not be 
more than 30 m. That is 
from any point of the 
area, there shall be one 
extinguisher within a 
distance of 30 m. 

iii. Extinguishers shall be 
placed along the corri-
dors, waiting areas, 
shops, supermarkets, 
service corridors, staff 
and reception areas 
etc., where people can 
easily find and use 
them during fire acci-
dents. 

iv. As a practice fire extin-
guishers are placed in 
Fire Hose Cabinets in 
UAE. Such cabinets 
shall clearly have sign-
age that indicates pres-
ence of extinguishers 
inside the Fire Hose 
Cabinet (FHC) 

1.  CLASS A 

8. DETENTION AND           

FIRES 

CORRECTION 

 
i.  Multi-purpose Dry Pow-

der (ONE) 

2-A, 20-B, C 
4 Kg 
 
 
 
 
 
OR 
 
i.  CLEAN Agent Type (ONE) 
4 Kg 
 
 
 
 
 
AND 
 
i.  CO2 Type (ONE) 
5 Kg 

i.  Corridors 
ii.  Waiting areas 
iii. Assembly areas 
iv. Dining areas 
v.  Exit routes 
 
9. MERCANTILE 
i.  Office areas 
ii.  Shops 
iii. Supermarkets 
iv. Retail areas 
v.  Corridors 
vi. Exit routes 
 
10. MALLS 
i.  Corridors 
ii.  Information Desk 
iii. Service Corridor 
iv. Mall circulation areas 
v.  Play areas 
vi. Food courts 
vii. Exit routes 
 
11. STORAGE (WAREHOUSE) 

AND FACTORIES 

i.  Office areas 
ii.  Corridors 
 
12. ANIMAL HOUSING 
i.  Office areas 
ii.  Corridors 
iii. Storage areas 
 
12. FUEL DISPENSING 
i.  Mini Marts 
ii.  Restaurant seating areas 
 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 374 of 1348 

 

Table 4.3: Application of Fire Extinguishers 

HAZARD 

AREA 

TYPE OF EXTINGUISHER 

DISTRIBUTION 

i.  Foam Type (ONE) 
9 Liters (3 Gal) 
 
 
 
 
 
AND 
 
i.  Multi-purpose Dry Powder (ONE) 
2-A, 20-B, C 
4 Kg 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

i.  Each extinguisher 
of size mentioned 
serves approxi-
mately 280 m2 of 
the area. 

ii.  Maximum travel 
distance to such 
an extinguisher 
shall not be more 
than 15 m. That is 
from any point of 
the area, there 
shall be one extin-
guisher within a 
distance of 15 m. 
iii. Extinguishers shall 

be placed along 
the corridors, 
waiting areas, 
shops, supermar-
kets, service corri-
dors, staff and 
reception areas 
etc., where peo-
ple can easily find 
and use them dur-
ing fire accidents. 
iv. As a practice fire 
extinguishers are 
placed in Fire 
Hose Cabinets in 
UAE. Such cabi-
nets shall clearly 
have signage that 
indicates presence 
of extinguishers 
inside the Fire 
Hose Cabinet 
(FHC) 

2.  CLASS B 

FIRES 

1. ASSEMBLY 
i.  Bars 
ii.  Pubs 
iii. Night Clubs 
 
2. EDUCATIONAL 
i.  Laboratories 
ii.  Cleaning solvent 

stores 

 
3. HEALTHCARE 
i.  Chemical Stores 
ii.  Linen Stores 
iii. Waste Storage 
iv. Cleaning solvent 

stores 

 
4. HOTEL 
i.  Chemical Stores 
ii.  Linen Stores 
iii. Waste Storage 
iv. Cleaning solvent 

stores 

 
5. MERCANTILE 
i.  Chemical Stores 
ii.  Flammable liquid 

Stores 

 
6. MALLS 
i.  Service Corridor 
ii.  Cleaning solvent 

stores 

 
7. STORAGE 

(WAREHOUSE) 
AND FACTORIES 
i.  Chemical Storage 

and activity 

ii.  Flammable liquid 

Storage and activity 
iii. Flammable material 
Storage and activity 

 
 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 375 of 1348 

 

 

Table 4.3: Application of Fire Extinguishers 

HAZARD 

AREA 

TYPE OF EXTINGUISHER 

DISTRIBUTION 

3.  CLASS B 

1. FUEL DISPENSING  

FIRES 

STATIONS 

i.  Petrol Filling     

Station 

 
2. STORAGE 

(WAREHOUSE) 
AND FACTORIES 
i.  Bulk storage of 

flammable liquids  

ii.  Group A Plastic 

storage and activi-
ty 

 
3.  DIESEL GENERA-

TOR ROOM, DIE-
SEL GENERATOR 
SET/SHED 

4. PARKING AREAS 

i.  Wheeled Type Foam  (ONE) 
50 Liters (13 Gal) 
 
 
 
 
 
AND 
 
i.  Multi-purpose Dry Powder (ONE) 
2-A, 20-B, C 
4 Kg 
 
 
 
 

i.  Maximum travel 

distance to such an 
extinguisher shall 
not be more than 
15 m. That is from 
any point of the ar-
ea, there shall be 
one extinguisher 
within a distance of 
15 m. 

ii.  Extinguishers shall 
be placed  near the 
hazard in protected 
environment as per 
manufacturer’s 
guidelines. 

 

4.  CLASS C 

1.    ELECTRICAL/LV 

FIRES 

ROOM 

2.  TELEPHONE 

ROOM 

3.  LIFT MACHINE 

ROOM 

4.  AHU ROOM 
5.  MECHANICAL 
PLANT ROOM 
6.  CABLE SPREAD-

ING ROOMS 

7.  RMU ROOMS 
8.  SWITCHGEAR 

ROOM 

 

i.  CO2 Type (ONE) 
5 Kg 
 
 
 
 
 
OR 
 
i. CLEAN Agent Type (ONE) 
5 Kg 

5.  CLASS C 

FIRES 

9.    HV ROOM 
10. TRANSFORMER 

i.  Wheeled CO2 Type (ONE) 
12 Kg 

ROOM 

11. ELECTRICAL 

HEAVY EQUIP-
MENT AND 
MACHINARY 

 

i.  Maximum travel 

distance to such an 
extinguisher shall 
not be more than 9 
m. That is from any 
point of the area, 
there shall be one 
extinguisher within 
a distance of 9 m. 

ii.  Extinguisher shall be 

placed inside the 
room next to exit. 

i.  Maximum travel 

distance to such an 
extinguisher shall 
not be more than 9 
m. That is from any 
point of the area, 
there shall be one 
extinguisher within 
a distance of 9 m. 
ii.  Trolley mounted 

extinguisher shall be 
placed inside the 
room, next to exit. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 376 of 1348 

 

Table 4.3: Application of Fire Extinguishers 

HAZARD 

AREA 

TYPE OF EXTINGUISHER  DISTRIBUTION 

6.  CLASS K 

1. KITCHEN, HOMES 

FIRES 

i.  Extinguishers shall be 
placed inside kitchen 
next to Kitchen exit 
door. 

i. Multi-purpose Dry Powder 

(ONE) 

3A, 20-B, C 
2.5 Kg 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

7.  CLASS K 

2.  COMMERCIAL 

FIRES 

KITCHENS 

3.  RESTAURANT  

KITCHENS 

4.  FOOD COURT  

KITCHENS 

 

i.  Wet Chemical Type (ONE) 
9 Liters (3 Gal) 
 
AND 
 
i.  CO2 Type (ONE) 
5 Kg 

i.  Extinguishers shall be 
placed inside kitchen 
next to Kitchen exit 
door. 

i.  Wheeled D Type (ONE) 
12 Kg 

i.  Maximum travel dis-

tance to such an extin-
guisher shall not be 
more than 15 m. That is 
from any point of the 
area, there shall be one 
extinguisher within a 
distance of 15 m. 

8. CLASS D FIRES  1.   ACTIVITIES WHERE 

COMBUSTIBLE    
METALS SUCH AS   
MAGNESIUM,       
TITANIUM,            
ZIRCONIUM,         
SODIUM, LITHIUM, 
AND POTASSIUM 
ARE STORED AND 
HANDLED 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 377 of 1348 

3. Design, Installation, Inspection and Maintenance of Fire  

Fire Extinguishers 

 

 
3.1. 
 

Design/Specification and Submittals 

3.1.1.  Design, Specifications and Submittals to Civil Defence for approval shall be main 
consultants responsibility. Consultant shall have competent and knowledgeable 
personnel to understand the Civil Defence requirements and codes and standards. 

 
3.1.2.  Design submittals shall be complete with appropriate selection of fire extinguish-
ers, location on layouts as per maximum travel distances and table of number of 
fire extinguishers, in compliance with this code. 

 
Installation 

3.2. 
 

3.2.1. 

 
3.2.2. 

 
3.2.3. 

 
3.2.4. 

 
3.2.5. 

Installation of Fire Extinguishers shall be carried out only by Civil Defence approved 
and licensed contractors. General contractors, Civil contractors and MEP Contrac-
tors, fitout Contractors shall not be allowed to install Fire extinguishers, unless 
they are licensed. 

Fire extinguisher Installation contractor qualification and approval from Civil De-
fence is based on their training from respective system manufacturers, experience, 
understanding of codes and standards and workmanship. 

Fire extinguisher Installation contractors shall apply to Civil Defence and secure 
passing marks in Civil Defence examination to gain license and be qualified as 
“approved Fire extinguisher contractors”. 

Installation contractor shall not commence work on site without receiving Civil De-
fence stamped and approved drawings from the Consultant. 

It is contractors responsibility to adhere to consultant’s Civil Defence approved 
drawings and Manufacturer’s installation guidelines and specifications. 

 
Inspection and Acceptance 

Inspection and acceptance shall be main consultant’s responsibility. 

3.3.1. 
 
3.3.2.  Main consultant shall inspect contractor work during installations and ensure that 
fire extinguishers are charged, installed, inspected, commissioned and performing 
as per the Civil Defence approved drawings, manufacturer’s design and installation 
guidelines, acceptance criteria and their intended purpose. 

 
3.3.3. 

Consultant shall handover total number, types, location of fire extinguishers,  in-
spection report and maintenance manuals to the owner. 

Inspection and Maintenance 

3.4.1. 

The building owner, his appointed representative and the facility management 
shall be responsible to ensure that all the Fire Extinguishers in the facility are in-
spected regularly, maintained, charged and repaired to serve their intended pur-
pose during fire accidents. 

 

3.3. 
 

 
3.4. 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 378 of 1348 

3.4.2. 
 
3.4.3. 

The inspection and maintenance of Fire Extinguishers shall be as per Table 4.4. 

The fire extinguishers shall be serviced and maintained once every year. The Table 
4.4 requirements are minimum guidelines. NFPA 10 shall be referred for further 
details and maintenance requirements. 

Table 4.4: Inspection and Maintenance of Fire Extinguishers 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  ACCEPTANCE 
INSPECTION  

i. 

The location, designated place and appropriate type/rating of extinguisher for 
the hazard shall be verified and ensure that it is as per consultant and Civil De-
fence approved drawings. 
Extinguisher shall be installed at proper height as per this chapter. 

ii. 
iii.  The extinguisher shall be free of obstruction and in compliance with maximum 

travel distance requirements as per this chapter.  

iv.  Safety seals and tamper indicators shall be in place and not damaged or missing. 
v.  Operating instructions and labels on nameplates shall be legible and facing for-

ward and visible. 

vi.  Extinguisher shall be fully charged, weighing correctly as per manufacturer’s 

specification. 

vii.  Fie extinguishers shall be free of physical damage, dents, corrosion, leakage. 
viii.  Nozzles and spray horns shall be free of clogging. 
ix.  Pressure gauge reading or indicator shall be in the acceptable range as per man-

ufacturer’s specifications. 

x.  Where wheeled or trolley mount extinguishers are installed, condition of tires, 

wheels, carriage, hose and nozzles shall be in good working condition.  

xi.  Visual signage, pointing at the location of extinguisher, both in Arabic and Eng-

lish shall be in place and visible. 

xii.  Corrective actions shall be taken if any of the above inspections result in unac-

ceptable conditions. 

xiii.  A record of the acceptance test shall be maintained in the facility. 

2.  DAILY             
INSPECTIONS 

i. 

Facility management should check daily, but not more than monthly, the loca-
tion and presence of appropriate extinguisher as per hazard and ensure that 
extinguishers are not shuffled from their suitable locations. 

ii.  Pressure gauge of extinguishers shall be verified to be in acceptable range. 

3.  MONTHLY     
INSPECTIONS 

i. 

Facility management shall check monthly the location and presence of appropri-
ate extinguisher as per hazard and ensure that extinguishers are not shuffled 
from their suitable locations. 

ii.  Pressure gauge of extinguishers shall be verified to be in acceptable range. 
iii.  Extinguishers shall be taken out from their hangers, cleaned and put back onto 

iv. 

i. 

4.  ANNUAL        
INSPECTIONS 

their hangers. 
If any of the extinguisher is taken out for repair or recharging, a replacement 
extinguisher of the same type and rating shall be installed in its place. 

Stored-pressure types containing a loaded stream agent shall be disassembled 
on an annual basis and subjected to complete maintenance. Prior to disassem-
bly, the fire extinguisher shall be fully discharged to check the operation of the 
discharge valve and pressure gauge. The loaded stream charge shall be per-
mitted to be recovered and re-used, provided it is subjected to agent analysis in 
accordance with manufacturer’s instructions.  

ii.  A conductivity test shall be conducted annually on all carbon dioxide hose as-

semblies. Hose assemblies found to be nonconductive shall be replaced. Carbon 
dioxide hose assemblies that pass a conductivity test shall have the test infor-
mation recorded on a suitable metallic label or equally durable material. 

iii.  Pressure regulators provided with wheeled-type fire extinguishers shall be test-

ed for outlet static pressure and flow rate in accordance with manufacturer’s 
instructions. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 379 of 1348 

 

Table 4.4: Inspection and Maintenance of Fire Extinguishers 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

5.  MAINTENANCE   1.  EQUIPMENT/CYLINDERS 

 
i. 

Extinguishers shall be in charged condition as per manufacturer’s specifica-
tions. 

ii.  All mechanical parts shall be inspected for smooth operation. 
iii.  Hydrostatic tests shall be conducted or extinguishers shall be replaced if there 

are signs of corrosion, mechanical damage, denting or abrasion. 

iv.  Damaged threads, damaged gauges, damaged seals and locks etc. shall be 

replaced. 

v.  Deformed nozzles, clogged nozzles, blocked nozzles shall be replaced/cleaned 

and ensured that it is in good working condition. 

vi.  Damaged, cracked or torn hose assemblies shall be replaced. 
vii.  Valves, gauges, pressure indicating devices shall be free of damage. if dam-

aged, shall be replaced. 

viii.  If puncture mechanism is damaged, dull, shall be replaced. 
ix.  Corroded, damaged carriage for trolley type extinguishers, shall be repaired or 

replaced. 

x.  Damaged, wheels, spokes, jammed wheels shall be replaced in wheel type 

extinguishers. 

xi.  Damaged gaskets, “O” rings and seals shall be replaced. 
xii.  Corroded, damaged gas tubes, siphon or pickup tube shall be replaced. 
 
2.  EXTINGUISHING AGENT 
 
i.  WATER: If improper fill level, refill. 
ii. 
iii.  CO2: If improper weight, recharge to proper weight. 
iv.  DRY CHEMICAL/DRY POWDER: If agent is contaminated or caking, empty, 

FOAM: If recharge date is due, empty, clean and recharge. 

clean and refill. If improper weight, refill to specifications. If cartridge is dam-
aged, tampered or punctured, replace cartridge. 

v.  WET CHEMICAL: IF improper weight, empty, clean and refill. if pressure not in 

acceptable range, re-pressurize.  

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 380 of 1348 

4.   Fire Extinguisher Material Test Standards and Approval. 

 

4.1. Acceptable Test Standards and criteria 
 

4.1.1.  All the Extinguishers, Extinguishing agents, Materials, Systems, Assemblies, Hose, 

Pipes, nozzles and fittings, equipment, Products and Accessories, referred to in this 
chapter shall be Listed, Approved and Registered by the Civil Defence Material Ap-
proval Department. 

 
4.1.2.  There is no year of edition mentioned against any test standards. It is the intent of 

Civil Defence to convey to the customers seeking laboratory tests and the test la-
boratories to follow the “LATEST EDITION OF THE TEST STANDARD, AS AND WHEN 
THEY ARE UPGRADED/REVISED/AMENDED, TO THE DATE.” 

4.1.3.  Portable Extinguisher (General) 
 

i.   ANSI/UL 711, Standard for Rating and Fire Testing of Fire Extinguishers 
ii.  ANSI/NFPA 10, Portable Fire Extinguishers 
iii. CAN/ULC-S508-M90, Standard for Rating and Fire Testing of Fire Extinguishers 

and Class D Extinguishing Media 

iv. EN 3-7 +A1, EN 3-8, EN 3-9, Portable fire extinguishers. Characteristics, perfor-

mance requirements and test methods. 

 

4.1.4.  Mobile (Wheeled/Trolley) Type Extinguisher 
 

 EN 1866-1, 2, 3. Mobile fire extinguishers Characteristics performance and test 
methods. 

i. 

 

4.1.5.  CO2 Extinguisher 
 

 ANSI/UL 154, Standard for Carbon Dioxide Fire Extinguishers;  

i. 
ii.   CAN/ULC-S503-M90, Standard for Carbon Dioxide Hand and Wheeled Fire Extin-

guishers. 

iii. EN 1866-1, Standard for Carbon Dioxide Wheeled Fire Extinguishers. 
iv. EN ISO 5923, Equipment for fire protection and fire fighting.  Fire extinguishing 

media.  Carbon  

 

6.1.6.  Dry Chemical/Dry Powder Extinguisher 
 

i.  UL 299, Standard for Dry Chemical Fire Extinguishers; 
ii.  CAN/ULC-S504-M86, Standard for Dry Chemical and Dry Powder Hand and 

Wheeled Fire Extinguishers. 

iii.  EN 615, Fire protection, fire extinguishing media specifications for powder 

(other than class D powders) 

 
 
 

 

 

  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 381 of 1348 

 

4.1.7.  Water Type Extinguisher 
 

i.   ANSI/UL 626, Standard for Water based Fire Extinguishers; 
ii.   CAN/ULC-S507-92, Standard for 9 Liter Stored Pressure Water Type Fire Extin-

guishers. 

 

4.1.8.  Foam Type Extinguisher 
 

i.   ANSI/UL 8, Standard for Foam Fire Extinguishers. 
 

4.1.9.  Halocarbon Type Extinguisher 
 

i.   ANSI/UL 2129, Standard for Halocarbon Agent Fire Extinguishers 
 

4.1.10. Fire Blankets 
 

i.   EN 1869, Standard for Fire Blanket 
ii.   BS 7944, Type 1 heavy duty fire blankets and type 2 heavy duty heat protective 

blankets. 

 
 

 

 

  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 382 of 1348Chapter 5 
EXIT SIGNS 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 383 of 1348In this Chapter:
 Specifications of exit signs and directional markings.

 Location of exit and directional markings. 

 Standard format of the “Emergency Evacuation Plans”.
 

Intent of the Chapter: 

• 

• 

To provide clear and visible exit signs and directional marking in a facility to 
enable people to find exits swiftly and easily during emergencies. 
To standardize the exit signs, directional signs and emergency evacuation plans. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 384 of 1348 

In this Chapter : 

Intent of the Chapter 

  Specifications of Exit Signs and 

Directional Markings 

  Location of Exit and Directional 

markings 

  Standard format of the 

“Emergency Evacuation Plans” 

  To provide clear and visible exit signs and directional 

marking in a facility to enable people to find exits swiftly 
and easily during emergencies. 

  To standardize the Exit Signs, Directional Signs and 

Emergency Evacuation Plans. 

1. Definitions 

1.1. General 

It is a mandatory requirement from Civil Defence. 

It is a suggested requirement recommended by Civil Defence but not mandatory. 

Approved and registered by individual Emirates’ Civil Defence material department. 

The SI unit of illumination equal to a luminous flux of 1 lumen per square meter.  
1 lux = 0.0929 foot-candle  

1.1.1.  Shall  
 
 
1.1.2.  Should 
 
 
1.1.3.  Listed 
 
 
1.1.4.  Lux  
 
 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 385 of 1348 

 

1.2. Exit Signage 

 
1.2.1.  Exit Sign  
 

An Exit Sign is a visual marking with text and pictorial sign in a facility denoting the 
identification of an exit in case of fire or other emergency. 

 
1.2.2.  Exit Directional Sign (Directional Marking) 
 

A Directional Exit Sign is a visual marking with text and pictorial sign in a facility de-
noting the direction  and route to reach the closest emergency exit in case of fire or 
other emergency. 

 
1.2.3.  Tactile Sign  
 

Tactile signing is a common means of communication used by people with both a 
sight and hearing impairment, which is based on a standard system of Deaf manual 
signs. 

 
1.2.4.  Photoluminescent Sign  
 

Signs made up of Photoluminescent material where luminescence (visible light) 
results from the absorption of light or infrared or ultraviolet radiation . 

 
1.2.5.  Illumination  
 

The intensity of light falling on a surface, the luminous flux incident per unit area, ex-
pressed in lumens per unit of area Intensity of lighted surface. 

 
1.2.6.  Means of Egress  
 

A continuous and unobstructed way of travel from any point in a building or structure 
to a public way consisting of three separate and distinct parts: (1) the exit access, (2) 
the exit, and (3) the exit discharge. 

A path that leads to No Emergency Exits. 

That portion of a means of egress that leads to an exit. 

 
1.2.7.  Dead End  
 
 
1.2.8.  Exit Access 
 
 
1.2.9.  Exit 
 

That portion of a means of egress that is separated from all other spaces of the interi-
or spaces of building or structure by fire resistance rated construction and opening 
protective as required to provide a protected way of travel from Exit access to the exit 
discharge. 

 
1.2.10.  Exit Discharge 
 

That portion of a means of egress between the termination of an exit and a public 
way. 

 
1.2.11.  Area of Refuge.  
 

An area that is either (1) a story in a building where the building is protected 
throughout by an approved, supervised automatic sprinkler system and has not less 
than two accessible rooms or spaces separated from each other by smoke-resisting 
partitions; or (2) a space located in a path of travel leading to a public way that is 
protected from the effects of fire, either by means of separation from other spaces 
in the same building or by virtue of location, thereby permitting a delay in egress 
travel from any level. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 386 of 1348 

2.  Exit Signs 

 

2.1. Intention 

2.1.1.  The provisions of this chapter require that all exits and exit routes in a facility be 

identified and marked with visible and tactile signs to enable people find their way 
out during fire emergencies. 

 
2.1.2.  Such exit signs and directional marking sizes, locations and maximum distance of 

signs shall be specified as per this chapter. 

 

2.2. General 

2.2.1. 

In all buildings, except for One-and-Two-Family Dwelling, every exit on every floor 
shall be clearly indicated by an exit sign placed over the exit door. Such signs shall be 
placed so as to be clearly visible at all times.  

 
2.2.2.  The route to such emergency exit shall be 
identified with directional signs to indicate 
the path and direction to exits.  

 
2.2.3.  Exits signs are required to be illuminated – 

either internally or externally – while the 
building has normal electrical power and 
the building is occupied.  

 
2.2.4.  The Exit sign must be illuminated and clear-

ly visible at all times the building is occu-
pied.  

 
2.2.5.  During loss of power in the building, the exit 

signs shall be illuminated using building 
emergency power or building emergency 
lighting or Signs shall be Photoluminescent 
where upon loss of power, the signs are re-
illuminated and clearly visible. 

Did You Know? 

A Code complaint Exit 

Signs and Directional Exit 

Signs in a building are 

not only important for    

occupant evacuation, but 

equally important for fire 

fighters and rescue 

teams, who are new to  

facility, to locate exits,  

elevators, equipment 

swiftly in smoke clogged               

environment. 

 
2.2.6.  The requirements of this chapter are minimum guidelines. It is consultant’s responsi-
bility to refer to the international codes, standards and Civil Defence signage practic-
es that this chapter is based on, for clear understanding of signage requirements, 
visibility of signage, location of signage, illumination of signage etc.  

 
2.2.7.  Codes, Standards and documents referred for this chapter are NFPA 101, NFPA 110, 

NFPA 111, NFPA 170, NFPA 70, ISO 3864, Civil Defence evacuation policies and 
signage. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 387 of 1348 

2.3. Exit Sign and Directional Sign Specifications  

2.3.1.  The exit Sign and Directional marking specification shall be as per Table 5.1. 
 

 

Table 5.1: Specifications of Exit Signs and Directional Markings 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  EXIT SIGN 

1.  SIZE OF LETTERS 
 
i.  Exit Signs shall read “EXIT” in English and Arabic in plainly legible letters. 
ii.  Letters shall not be less than 150 mm (6”) in height and principal strokes of 

letters not less than 19 mm (3/4”) wide. Width of each letter shall not be less 
than 51 mm, proportionally. 

iii. Minimum spacing between letters shall be not less than 9.5 mm (3/8”) 
iv. Signs using larger sizes than mentioned in Table 5.1.1.1.ii., shall use letter 

widths, strokes and spacing in proportion to their height. 

 
2.  SIZE OF RUNNING MAN 
 
i.  The image of Running man towards the exit door shall not be less than 150 mm 

(6”) in height. 

ii.  Minimum spacing between the running man image and EXIT letter shall not be 

less than 9.5 mm (3/8”). 

iii. The running man shall be heading towards an open door in the image.  
 
3.  COLOURS 
 
i.  Letter “EXIT” shall be in matte White colour on Green background. 
ii.  The “RUNNING MAN TOWARDS AN OPEN DOOR” shall be in Green colour on 

White, open door background. 

 

Figure 5.1.:  EXIT SIGN Specifications 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 388 of 1348 

Table 5.1: Specifications of Exit Signs and Directional Markings 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  SIZE OF LETTERS 
 
i.  Exit Signs shall read “EXIT” in English and Arabic in plainly legible letters. 
ii.  Letters shall not be less than 150 mm (6”) in height and principal strokes of 

letters not less than 19 mm (3/4”) wide. Width of each letter shall not be less 
than 51 mm, proportionally. 

iii. Minimum spacing between letters shall be not less than 9.5 mm (3/8”) 
iv. Signs using larger sizes than mentioned in Table 5.1.2.1.ii., shall use letter 

widths, strokes and spacing in proportion to their height. 

 
2.  SIZE OF DIRECTIONAL ARROW 
 
i.  The directional “arrow” indicator shall be located outside of the EXIT letters, not 

less than 9.5 mm (3/8”) from any letter. 

ii.  The directional “arrow” indicator shall be of a chevron type. 
iii. The directional indicator shall be identifiable as a directional indicator at a dis-

tance of 12 m. 

iv. A directional arrow larger than the minimum established for compliance with as 

per Table 5.1. 2.2.iii., shall be proportionately increased in height, width, and 
stroke. 

v.  The directional indicator shall be located at the end of the sign for the direction 

indicated. 

 
3.  SIZE OF RUNNING MAN 
 
i.  The image of Running man towards the exit door shall not be less than 150 mm 

(6”) in height. 

ii.  Minimum spacing between the running man image and EXIT letter shall not be 

less than 9.5 mm (3/8”). 

iii. The direction of running man’s posture shall be towards the same direction as 

the directional “arrow” mark. 

iv. The running man shall be heading towards an open door in the image.  
 
4.  COLOURS 
 
i.  Letter “EXIT” shall be in matte White colour on Green background. 
ii.  Directional “ARROW” shall be in White colour on Green background. 
iii. The “RUNNING MAN TOWARDS AN OPEN DOOR” shall be in Green colour on 

White, open door background. 

2.  DIRECTIONAL 

EXIT SIGN 

 

 

Figure 5.2.:  DIRECTIONAL EXIT SIGN Specifications 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 389 of 1348 

 

Table 5.1: Specifications of Exit Signs and Directional Markings 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

3.  TACTILE SIGNS 

i.  Tactile signage shall comply with ICC/ANSI A117.1, American National 

Standard for Accessible and Usable Buildings and Facilities. 

ii.  Refer to Chapter 13. ACCESSIBILITY, Table 13.4.2. Signs. 

4. PHOTOLUMINISCENT 

i.  The face of a Photoluminescent signs and strips shall be continually illumi-

SIGNS AND STRIPS 

nated while the building is occupied.  

ii.  Minimum of 54 lux (5 foot-candle) artificial light shall be illuminating the 

Photoluminescent surface during normal and emergency conditions. 

iii. The Photoluminescent signs and strips shall be within 3 m of such illumina-

tion source.   

iv. The illumination levels on the face of the Photoluminescent sign shall be in 

accordance with its listing.  

v.  The charging illumination shall be a reliable light source, as per its listing. 
The charging light source, shall be of a type specified in the product mark-
ings. 

vi. Photoluminescent signs shall not be installed where continuous illumina-
tion is not available during non-emergency situations. (Photoluminescent 
signs need a specific minimum level of light on the face of the sign to en-
sure that the sign is charged for emergency operation and legibility in both 
the normal and emergency modes. Additionally, the type of light source 
(e.g., incandescent, fluorescent, halogen, metal halide) is important. Each 
light source produces different types of visible and invisible light (e.g., UV) 
that might affect the ability of some Photoluminescent signs to charge and 
might also affect the amount of light output available during emergency 
mode.) 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 390 of 1348 

 

Table 5.1: Specifications of Exit Signs and Directional Markings 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

5. “NO EXIT” SIGN 

i.  The NO EXIT sign shall have the word NO in letters 51 mm (2”) high, with a 

stroke width of 9.5 mm (3/8”), and the word EXIT in letters 25 mm (1”) high, 
with the word EXIT below the word NO. 

6.  EVACUATION   

i.  Elevator signage is to indicate people if they can use the evacuation elevators 

ELEVATOR SIGNS 

during fire emergencies. 

ii.  These elevator signs are to be used in place of regular “DO NOT USE ELEVA-
TOR DURING FIRE” signs, if and only where the elevator is designed and ac-
cepted as a means of egress component to be an evacuation elevator as per 
Chapter 3, Section 3.9. and has been incorporated in building fire strategy. 

iii. These signs are for indicating usage of elevators during emergencies by both 

Civil Defence personnel and trained facility management. 

iv. These evacuation elevators shall be provided with signs reading                            

“ In the event of Fire, this elevator will be used by Civil Defence for 
evacuation of people.                                                                                     
PROTECTED ELEVATOR                                                                                                             
USABLE IN EMERGENCIES” 

v.  The minimum height of the letters in evacuation elevator signs shall not be 

less than 16 mm (5/8”), posted in every evacuation elevator lobby. 

7. FLOOR PROXIMITY 

i.  Floor proximity Exit Sign sizes and dimensions shall comply with Table 

SIGNS 

5.1.1. 

ii.  Floor proximity Directional Exit Sign sizes and dimensions shall comply 

with Table 5.1.2. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 391 of 1348 

 

Table 5.1: Specifications of Exit Signs and Directional Markings 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

8. EVACUATION 
PLAN             
DIAGRAM 

1.  GENERAL 
 
i.  Floor evacuation plans/diagrams reflecting the actual floor arrangement, exit loca-

tions AND DIRECTIONAL ARROWS TO SUCH EMERGENCY EXITS shall be posted. 
(Evacuation Plans are informational signs used to advise building occupants, be 
they employees, residents, patients, or visitors, of the best route(s) to egress the 
building. It is a pictorial representation of the building/floor layout showing the 
closest EXIT routes from a given point in the building.) 

 
2.  RESPONSIBILITY 
 
i.  Preparation of evacuation plans shall be consultants responsibility. Final evacua-

tion plans in compliance to this section, shall be fixed on each floor in the building. 
ii.  Maintaining the evacuation plan shall be the responsibility of the owner. damaged 
or faded or where areas and routes are modified, owner shall upgrade evacuation 
plans and replace with new one as per revised floor plans. 

 
3. CONTENT 
 
i. 
ii. 

Evacuation plans shall contain  English language and Arabic language. 
Evacuation plans shall only contain simple floor plans with floor number, rom 
names, emergency exits, routes to exits, location of stairs, elevators, refuge area 
location (If any), location of fire extinguishers, and location of fire hose cabinets. 
iii.  Evacuation plans should not show structural details, furniture layouts, floor tiles, 

ceiling tiles, interior fixtures and lighting. However, evacuation plans shall in-
clude certain distinguished landmark features in the floor which enable occu-
pants to identify the area immediately, such as fountains, statues, atriums. 
iv.  Evacuation plans shall clearly show “YOU ARE HERE” location and symbol. 
v. 
The entire floor plan should be shown with the primary and secondary exit 
routes, exit stairs, and elevators clearly identified. 

vi.  Routes and directional arrow marks shall not show paths which are not exit 

routes, which pass through lockable rooms, store rooms, hazardous rooms and 
terminate at dead ends. 

vii.  Evacuation plans shall show exit discharge and assembly points only if they are 

in that floor. 

viii.  Evacuation plans shall be specific to each floor and shall not contain information 

irrelevant to that floor. 

ix.  Evacuation plan Symbols shall be as per Figure 5.2. Symbols to be used in Evacu-

x. 

ation Plans. 
Evacuation plan shall have heading “EVACUATION PLAN” of  20 mm high letters, 
on top center. 

xi.  Below the heading shall be “FLOOR NUMBER/NAME” of 15 mm high letters. 
xii.  A legend in  showing meanings of symbols used such as fire extinguishers, fire 

hose cabinet etc., of 10 mm high, shall be at the bottom of the evacuation plan.  

 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 392 of 1348 

 

 

ITEMS 

8. EVACUATION 

PLAN         
DIAGRAM 

Table 5.1: Specifications of Exit Signs and Directional Markings 

REQUIREMENTS 

4. COLOURS 
 
i.  Heading, EVACUATION PLAN shall be in Black colour. 
ii.  FLOOR NAME/FLOOR NUMBER shall be in Black colour. 
iii.  Floor plans shall be in Grey walls on White background. 
iv.  Exit corridors, exit routes shall be FILLED in Green colour with Dark Green 

directional arrows. 

v.  Exit doors and exit stairs shall have Bold EXIT word /EXIT SIGN in Green 

colour. 

vi.  “YOU ARE HERE” word and symbol shall be in Red Colour. 
vii.  Symbols or Fire Extinguishers and Fire Hose Cabinet shall be in Red Col-

our. 

LEGEND shall be in Black colour. 

viii.  Room names shall be in Black Colour. 
ix.  Assembly point shall be in Green Colour. 
x. 
 
5.  FORMAT 
 
i. 

Evacuation plans shall be in 3D Format, showing elevated walls, stairs, rooms 
and floor plans in 3 dimensional perspective, as shown in Figure 5.4. Sample 
Evacuation plan. 
The symbols, letters, words, directional arrows shall be in regular 2D format. 

ii. 
iii.  Evacuation plan shall be 350 mm in height and 500 mm wide. 
iv.  Evacuation plans shall be framed and hanged on vertical walls.  
v. 
Evacuation plans shall not be stickers stuck on curved surfaces. 
vi.  Evacuation plans shall be colored printouts, laminated or photo-framed with 

glass. 

vii.  Evacuation plans shall not be on glossy background. 
viii.  It is highly recommended to provide Photoluminescent evacuation plans. 
 
6.  LOCATION 
 
i. 

The evacuation plan shall be posted where it is unobstructed, clearly visible and 
readable, located on vertical walls at eye level. 

ii.  Evacuation plans shall be posted in continuously illuminated place, where 10.8 

lux is the minimum illumination. 

iii.  Evacuation plans shall be located in main circulation areas, lift lobby, main corri-

dor. 

iv.  Evacuation plans shall not be located inside rooms, inside stairs and in hidden 

pockets on circulation areas. 

 
7.  NUMBERS 
 
i. 

The number of evacuation plans in each floor shall be based on the complexity 
of the floor design. However, there shall not be less than one evacuation plan 
located strategically in the middle of the floor circulation area where two emer-
gency exits/exit stairs are shown in two opposite directions on evacuation plan. 
For buildings with more than 2 exits/exit stairs, evacuation plans shall be posted 
in the middle of every 2 exits/exit stairs, showing 2 exit routes in opposite direc-
tions. 

ii. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 393 of 1348 

 

 

Figure 5.3.:  Symbols to be used in Evacuation Plans 

Figure 5.4.:  Sample Evacuation Plan 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 394 of 1348 

2.4. Installation of Exit Sign and Directional Sign  

2.4.1.  The installation of exit Sign and Directional marking shall be installed as per Table 

5.2. 

Table 5.2: Installation of Exit Signs and Directional Markings 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  ILLUMINATION  1.  ILLUMINATION 

 
i.  Every sign shall be continuously illuminated. 
ii.  Illumination of signs shall be permitted to be flash on and off upon fire alarm acti-

vation. 

 
2.  EXTERNALLY ILLUMINATED 
 
i.  Externally illuminated signs shall be illuminated by not less than 5 ft.-candles (54 
lux) at the illuminated surface and shall have a contrast ratio of not less than 0.5. 
The viewing distance for externally illuminated Signs shall be approximately 15 m. 
ii.  Externally illuminated signs shall be visible from 100 X H meters, where H is height 

of the Sign board. (Approximately 15 m) 

 
3.  INTERNALLY ILLUMINATED 
 
i.  Internally illuminated exit signs and directional markings shall be approved and 
registered by Civil Defence for the purpose. The viewing distance for internally 
illuminated Signs shall be approximately 30 m. 

ii.  Internally illuminated signs are visible from 150 X H meters, where H is the height 

of the Sign board. (Approximately 30 m) 

2. MOUNTING  

i.  The bottom of Exit Sign shall be located at a vertical distance of not more than 

1000 mm above the top edge of the egress opening intended for designation by 
that marking.  

ii.  Exit Sign shall be located at a horizontal distance of not more than 1000 mm, as 
measured from the edge of the egress opening intended for designation by that 
marking to the nearest edge of the marking . 

iii. Directional Exit Sign shall be installed at a height between 3000 mm—4000 mm 

from the finished floor. 

iv. Directional Exit Signs shall be installed at every change of direction and shall be perpen-

dicular to the direction of egress. 

v.  Floor proximity Exit Signs and Directional Signs shall be installed such that bottom 

of the sign shall not be less than 150 mm but not more than 455 mm above the 
finished floor. 

vi. Where floor proximity Exit Signs and Directional Signs are required to be provided 

for exit door. it shall be mounted adjacent to the door within 100 mm from door 
frame. 

i.  Every sign required shall be located and of such size, distinctive color, and design 
that it is readily visible and shall provide contrast with decorations, interior finish, 
or other signs. 

ii.  No decorations, furnishings, or equipment that impairs visibility of a sign shall be 
permitted. No brightly illuminated sign (for other than exit purposes), display, or 
object in or near the line of vision of the required exit sign that could detract 
attention from the exit sign shall be permitted. 

3. VISIBILITY 

4. DISTANCE 

i.  No point in exit corridor or exit access corridor shall be in excess of the rated view-

 

ing distance or 30 m, whichever is less, from nearest Exit Sign/Directional Sign/
Floor proximity Sign.  

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 395 of 1348 

 

 

 

Figure 5.5.:  EXIT SIGN and DIRECTIONAL EXIT SIGN MOUNTING 

Figure 5.6.:  EXIT SIGNS Mounting to cater to intersection  

Figure 5.7.:  Floor Proximity Exit Sign Mounting 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 396 of 1348 

3. Application of Exit Signs and Directional marking 

 

3.1. 
 
3.2. 

 

The application of exit Signs and Directional marking shall be as per Table 5.3. 

The Installation of Exit Signs, Directional Signs and Floor proximity Signs shall comply with 
Table 5.2. 

 

Table 5.3: Application of Exit Signs and Directional Markings 

LOCATION 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  AT EXIT 
DOORS 

i. 

Exit Doors, at exit corridors, providing exits that lead to Exit discharge or to 
assembly points shall be provided with Exit Signs complying to Table 5.1.1. 
ii.  Doors in Horizontal Exits shall be provided with Exit Signs complying to         

Table 5.1.1. 

iii.  Tactile Signs, in compliance with Table 5.1.3. shall be installed at every exit 

location where Exit Signs are required by Table 5.2. 

iv.  Floor proximity Exit signs shall comply with Table 5.1.7. 

2.  AT EXIT STAIR 

i. 

ii. 

Exit stairs, providing exits that lead to Exit discharge or to assembly points shall 
be provided with Exit Signs complying to Table 5.1.1. 
Tactile Signs, in compliance with Table 5.1.3. shall be installed at every exit 
location where Exit Signs are required by Table 5.2. 

iii.  Floor proximity Exit signs, if provided shall comply with Table 5.1.7. 

3. EXIT ACCESS 
CORRIDORS 

4. DEAD ENDS 

i. 
ii. 

i. 

The Directional Signs shall be provided in compliance with Table 5.1.2. 
Floor proximity Directional signs, if provided shall comply with Table 5.1.7. 

NO EXIT signs shall be provided at any door, passage or stair that is neither an 
exit nor way of exit access and that is located or arranged that it is likely to be 
mistaken for an exit. 

ii.  NO EXIT sign shall comply with Table 5.1.5. 

5. ELEVATOR 

i. 

SIGNS 

Any elevator that qualifies as evacuation elevator as defined in Chapter 3., 
Section 3.9., shall be provided with Evacuation Elevator Sign in compliance 
with  Table 5.1.6. 

6. ASSEMBLY   

OCCUPANCIES 

Exit Signs and Directional Signs shall be provided as per Section 3. 

i. 
ii.  All assembly occupancies shall be provided with Floor proximity Signs as per 

Table 5.1.7. 

iii.  Tactile Signs, in compliance with Table 5.1.3. shall be installed at every exit . 
iv.  Wash rooms shall be provided with Directional Signs as per Table 5.1.2. 
v. 

In special amusement buildings where mazes, mirrors, or other designs are 
used to confound the egress path, Directional exit marking  in compliance with 
Table 5.1.2., that becomes apparent in an emergency shall be provided. 

vi.  All amusement parks, indoor rides, theme parks, play areas shall be provided 

with Photoluminescent Exit Marking strips per Table 5.1. 4. 

vii.  Night Clubs and Discos shall be provided with Photoluminescent Exit Marking 

strips per Table 5.1. 4. 

viii.  Theaters and Cinemas shall be provided with Photoluminescent Exit Marking 

strips as per Table 5.1. 4. 

ix.  Evacuation Plan shall be provided in each floor and at multiple locations as per 

Table 5.1.8. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 397 of 1348 

 

Table 5.3: Application of Exit Signs and Directional Markings 

LOCATION 

REQUIREMENTS 

7.  BUSINESS       
OCCUPANCIES 

i. 
ii. 

Exit Signs and Directional Signs shall be provided as per Section 3. 
Evacuation Plan shall be provided in each floor and at multiple locations as 
per Table 5.1.8. 

iii.  Evacuation plans shall not be required inside individual tenant spaces which 

are open plan offices and main exit is visible. 

8.  EDUCATIONAL 

Exit Signs and Directional Signs shall be provided as per Section 3. 

i. 
ii.  Nurseries shall be provided with Photoluminescent Exit Marking strips as per 

Table 5.1. 4. 

iii.  Auditoriums shall be provided with Photoluminescent Exit Marking strips as 

per Table 5.1. 4. 

iv.  Evacuation Plan shall be provided in each floor and at multiple locations as 

per Table 5.1.8. 

9. HEALTHCARE  
OCCUPANCIES 

Exit Signs and Directional Signs shall be provided as per Section 3. 
Tactile Signs, in compliance with Table 5.1.3. shall be installed at every exit. 

i. 
ii. 
iii.  Patient rooms shall not be required to be provided with Exit Signs. 
iv.  Evacuation Plan shall be provided in each floor and at multiple locations as 

per Table 5.1.8. 

10. RESIDENTIAL 

OCCUPANCIES 

i. 

ii. 

Exit Signs and Directional Signs shall be provided at exit passageways and 
corridors as per Section 3. 
Residential apartments and dwelling units shall not be required to be provid-
ed with exit signs. 

iii.  Evacuation Plan shall be provided in each floor and at multiple locations as 

per Table 5.1.8. 

11. HOTEL 

Exit Signs and Directional Signs shall be provided as per Section 3. 
i. 
Tactile Signs, in compliance with Table 5.1.3. shall be installed at every exit  
ii. 
iii.  All hotel occupancies shall be provided with Floor proximity Signs as per      

Table 5.1.7. 

iv.  Guest rooms shall not be required to be provided with exit signs. 
v.  Evacuation Plan shall be provided in each floor, in each guest room and at 

multiple locations as per Table 5.1.8. 

12. DAY CARE     

OCCUPANCIES 

i. 
ii. 

Exit Signs and Directional Signs shall be provided as per Section 3. 
Evacuation Plan shall be provided in each floor and at multiple locations as 
per Table 5.1.8. 

13. DETENTION 
AND             
CORRECTIONAL 
OCCUPANCIES 

Exit Signs shall not be required in dwelling cell areas. 

i. 
ii.  General public areas, offices and areas accessible to general public shall be 

provided with Exit Signs and Directional Signs as per Section 3. 

iii.  Tactile Signs, in compliance with Table 5.1.3. shall be installed at every exit  
iv.  Evacuation Plan shall be provided in each floor and at multiple locations as 

per Table 5.1.8. 

14. MERCANTILE 

OCCUPANCIES 

Exit Signs and Directional Signs shall be provided as per Section 3. 

i. 
ii.  Directional Signs as per Table 5.1.2. shall be provided for aisles and rack are-

as where exit is not directly visible. 

iii.  Evacuation Plan shall be provided in each floor and at multiple locations as 

per Table 5.1.8. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 398 of 1348 

 

Table 5.3: Application of Exit Signs and Directional Markings 

LOCATION 

REQUIREMENTS 

15. STORAGE AND 

INDUSTRIAL 
OCCUPANCIES 

Exit Signs and Directional Signs shall be provided as per Section 3. 

i. 
ii.  High hazard areas (GROUP A-1 and GROUP A-2), Robotic storage and cold 
storage areas, industrial basements, Cable spread areas,  shall be provided 
with Photoluminescent Exit Marking strips as per Table 5.1. 4. 

iii.  Evacuation Plan shall be provided in each floor and at multiple locations as 

per Table 5.1.8. 

16.  MALLS 

17. PARKING 

Exit Signs and Directional Signs shall be provided as per Section 3. 
i. 
ii. 
Tactile Signs, in compliance with Table 5.1.3. shall be installed at every exit  
iii.  Play areas, Food courts and Cinema areas shall be provided with  Photolumi-

nescent Exit Marking strips as per Table 5.1. 4. 

iv.  Evacuation Plan shall be provided in each floor and at multiple locations as 

per Table 5.1.8. 

v.  Evacuation plans shall not be required at individual tenants. 

i. 
ii. 

Exit Signs and Directional Signs shall be provided as per Section 3. 
The vehicle exit route Signs shall be clearly distinguishable in size, in colour 
and in format from Exit Signs and Directional Signs as required by this chap-
ter. 

iii.  Robotic/Mechanical parking shall be provided with Photoluminescent Exit 

Marking strips on access walkways as per Table 5.1. 4. 

iv.  Evacuation Plan shall be provided in each floor and at multiple locations as 

per Table 5.1.8. 

18. PRIVATE      

i. 

VILLA 

Exit Signs are not required, unless usage has changed and converted into an-
other occupancy. 

19. COMMERCIAL 

i. 

VILLA 

Exit Signs are not required, unless usage has changed and converted into an-
other occupancy. 

i. 

Exit signs are not required, unless the buildings are other than facilities hav-
ing only ground floor. 

20. FUEL             
DISPENSING 
STATION 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 399 of 1348 

4. Design, Installation, Inspection and Maintenance of Exit 

Signs and Directional Signs 

 

 

4.1.  Design/Specification and Submittals 

 

4.1.1.  Design, Specifications and Submittals to Civil Defence for approval shall be main 
consultants responsibility. Consultant shall have competent and knowledgeable 
personnel to understand the Civil Defence requirements and codes and standards. 

 
4.1.2.  Design submittals shall be complete with appropriate Exit Sign and Directional 

Signs shown on the layouts. 

 
4.1.3. 
 
 

Consultant shall prepare Evacuation Plans in compliance with this chapter. 

4.2.  Installation 

4.2.1. 

 
4.2.2. 

 
4.2.3. 

 
4.2.4. 

 
4.2.5. 

 

Installation of Exit Signs and Directional Signs shall be carried out by the Civil De-
fence approved contractors under supervision of Consultant. 

Installation of Evacuation Plans shall be carried out by the Civil Defence approved 
contractors under supervision of Consultant. 

 Installation contractor shall not commence work on site without receiving Civil 
Defence stamped and approved drawings from the Consultant. 

It is contractors responsibility to adhere to consultant’s Civil Defence approved 
drawings and Manufacturer’s installation guidelines and specifications. 

Consultant shall ensure that all Exit Signs and Directional Signs are installed appro-
priately and where continuous illumination is available. 

4.3.  Inspection and Acceptance 

Inspection and acceptance shall be main consultant’s responsibility. 

4.3.1. 
 
4.3.2.  Main consultant shall inspect contractor work during installations and ensure that 
Exit Signs and Directional Signs are accurate and convey directions to exits as per 
site conditions. 

 
4.3.3. 

 

Consultant shall verify Evacuation Plans location fixed by the contractors. 

4.4.. Inspection and Maintenance 

 

4.4.1. 

 
4.4.2. 

 
4.4.3. 

The building owner, his appointed representative and the facility management 
shall be responsible to ensure that all the Exit Signs, Directional Signs and Evacua-
tion Plans are free of damage, wear and tear and in visible location, in compliance 
with this chapter. 

Every 30 days, owner appointed facility management shall verify visually for opera-
tion of illumination sources. 

Exit signs and Directional Signs connected to, or provided with, a battery-operated 
emergency illumination source, shall be tested and maintained in accordance with 
Chapter 6. 

 

 

  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 400 of 1348 

5.   Exit Sign Material Test Standards and Approval. 

 

5.1. Acceptable Test Standards and criteria 
 

5.1.1.  All the Signage Materials, Systems, Assemblies, Products and Accessories, referred 
to in this chapter shall be Listed, Approved and Registered by the Civil Defence Ma-
terial Approval Department. 

 
5.1.2.  There is no year of edition mentioned against any test standards. It is the intent of 

Civil Defence to convey to the customers seeking laboratory tests and the test la-
boratories to follow the “LATEST EDITION OF THE TEST STANDARD, AS AND WHEN 
THEY ARE UPGRADED/REVISED/AMENDED, TO THE DATE.” 

5.1.3.  Exit Signs 
 

i.   ANSI/UL 924, Standard for Emergency Lighting and Power Equipment. 
ii.  BS ISO 3864, Standard for Fire Safety Signs 
iii. BS 5499-1, Standard for Exit Signs 
 

5.1.4.  Tactile Signs 
 

i.   UL 924, Standard for Emergency Lighting and Power Equipment. 
 

5.1.5.  Photoluminescent Signs 
 

i.   UL 1994, Standard for Luminous Egress Path Marking Systems. 
 
 

 

 

  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 401 of 1348Chapter 6 
EMERGENCY LIGHTING 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 402 of 1348In this Chapter:
 Types of acceptable emergency lighting systems

 Specifications for emergency lighting systems

 Installation and maintenance of emergency lighting systems
 

Intent of the Chapter 

• 
• 

• 

To provide design basis for emergency lighting system. 
To provide illumination for exit routes during power failure to enable people to 
find exits swiftly and easily during emergencies. 
To enable fire fighters to locate firefighting equipment, to find trapped persons 
and to maneuver through building easily during emergencies and power failures. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 403 of 13481.1.1.  Shall  
 
 
1.1.2.  Should 
 
 
1.1.3.  Listed 
 
 
1.1.4.  Lux  
 

Approved and registered by individual Emirates’ Civil Defence material department. 

The SI unit of illumination equal to a luminous flux of 1 lumen per square meter. This 
is the luminous flux density at a given surface. 

 
 

 

1 lux = 0.0929 foot-candle  

 

In this Chapter : 

Intent of the Chapter 

  Types of acceptable Emergency 

Lighting Systems 

  Specifications for Emergency 

lighting Systems 

  Installation and Maintenance 

of Emergency Lighting Systems 

  To provide design basis for Emergency Lighting System. 

  To provide illumination for exit routes during power 

failure to enable people to find exits swiftly and easily 
during emergencies. 

  To enable fire fighters to locate fire fighting equipment, 

to find trapped persons and to maneuver through 
building easily during emergencies and power failures.  

1. Definitions 

1.1. General 

It is a mandatory requirement from Civil Defence. 

It is a suggested requirement recommended by Civil Defence but not mandatory. 

 

 
 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 404 of 13481.2. Emergency Lighting 

 
1.2.1.  Emergency Lighting 
 

The lighting that is for use to illuminate means of egress when there is a mains power 
or circuit failure. 

 
1.2.2.  Battery 
 

Storage cells, storing energy and providing the power during mains failure. A lead-
acid battery consisting of sealed cells furnished with a valve that opens to vent the 
battery whenever the internal pressure of the battery exceeds the ambient pressure 
by a set amount is called valve regulated Lead Acid. (VRLA) 

 
1.2.3.  Battery – Sealed 
 

A battery where the electrolyte cannot be replaced. Where electrolyte is required to 
be replaced is called “vented”. 

 
1.2.4.  Battery Capacity 
 

The capability of the battery under discharge situation measured in Ampere-hours 
(Ah, over one hour).  

 
1.2.5.  Central Battery System 
 

A central unit at central location that houses the batteries and control gear for a num-
ber of emergency lighting luminaires. 

 
1.2.6.  Self Contained Emergency Light 
 

An emergency luminaire that houses all the electrical components. Typically a light 
source, control gear and battery. 

 
1.2.7.  Monitored-type Emergency Light 
 

A set of self contained emergency lighting luminaire that is wired to control units to 
monitor and diagnose the health of the circuit and batteries. 

 
1.2.8.  Maintained Emergency Light 
 

A luminaire that contains one or more light sources that are permanently illuminated 
during normal and emergency situations.  

 
1.2.9.  Non-Maintained Emergency Light 
 

A Luminaire that contains one or more light sources and only illuminates during a 
mains or circuit failure situation. 

 
1.2.10.  Uninterruptible Power Supply (UPS) 
 

A device that provides emergency power to a load when the main source fails. Typi-
cally a luminaire is connected to the mains through a UPS, the UPS provides mains 
output to the luminaire when it detects a failure to the incoming mains. 

 
1.2.11.  Luminous Intensity (Cd) 
 
 
1.2.12.  Rated duration 
 

 

The power of the light source to emit light in a given direction measured in candela. 

The specified duration of light output from the luminaire operating from it’s battery 
supply. Typically 1 to 3 hours on a fully charged battery. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 405 of 13481.2. Emergency Lighting 

The maximum load that can be placed on a system. 

 
1.2.13.  Rated Load 
 
 
1.2.14.  Emergency Power Supply System (EPSS) 
 

A complete functioning EPS system coupled to a system of conductors, discon-
necting means and overcurrent protective devices, transfer switches, and all con-
trol, supervisory, and support devices up to and including the load terminals of the 
transfer equipment needed for the system to operate as a safe and reliable source 
of electric power. 

 
1.2.15.  Stored Emergency Power Supply System (SEPSS) 
 

A system consisting of a UPS, a central battery system, or a motor generator, pow-
ered by a stored electrical energy source, together with a transfer switch designed 
to monitor preferred and alternate load power source and provide desired switch-
ing of the load, and all necessary control equipment to make the system functional. 

 
1.2.16.  Energy Conversion Equipment (ECE) 
 

A system of either a UPS, a battery bank and battery charger (central battery sys-
tem), or a rotating motor generator (with or without inertia flywheel), often sup-
plied by a central battery system power source. 

 
1.2.17.  Automatic Transfer Switch 
 

Self-acting equipment for transferring one or more load conductor connections 
from one power source to another. 

 
1.2.18.  Ballast 
 

An electrical ballast is a device intended to limit the amount of current in an electric 
circuit. Without ballast restriction, current would otherwise rise to luminaire de-
struction levels. 

 
 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 406 of 1348 

2.  Emergency Lighting 

 

2.1. Intention 
 

2.1.1.  The provisions of this chapter require that all exits and exit routes in a facility shall 

be provided with luminaries that are backed up by emergency power such as Battery 
or UPS. So that during fire emergencies and/or upon loss of power in the facility, 
means of egress is illuminated for evacuees with ‘emergency lighting’. 

 
2.1.2.  The objective of having emergency lighting during emergencies or when the normal 

lighting of the occupied building fails is to                                                                                     
a. Indicate clearly and unambiguously the escape routes.                                                 
b. Provide illumination along such routes to allow safe movement towards and 
through the exits provided.                                                                                                         
c. Ensure that fire alarm call points and fire 
fighting equipment provided along escape 
routes can be readily located.                                                                         
d. Permit continuity of High hazard opera-
tions to be terminated safely. 

Did You Know? 

The core purpose and  

requirements of        

 
2.1.2.  Such emergency lighting needs to be de-

signed, installed and maintained to achieve 
its purpose during emergencies. This chapter 
addresses the design, performance of the 
system, installation and maintenance re-
quirements for emergency lighting. 

 
 

2.2. General 
 

Emergency Lighting in a 

building has not been 

changed since 1927, 

when it was first            

introduced through NFPA 

exit codes  

2.2.1.  Three types of Emergency lighting systems are permitted by Civil Defence, depending 

on the nature of occupancy.                                                                                                                                 
a. Central Battery System.                                                                                                                        
b. Monitored Type Self-contained Emergency Lighting System.                                                 
c. Self Contained, stand alone Emergency Lighting. 

 
2.2.2.  The emergency lighting system shall be arranged to provide the required illumination 

automatically in the event of any interruption of normal lighting due to any of the 
following:                                                                                                                                              
a. Failure of a public utility or other outside electrical power supply.                                         
b. Opening of a circuit breaker or fuse.                                                                                                 
c. Manual act(s), including accidental opening of a switch controlling normal lighting 
Facilities. 

2.2.3.  The requirements in this chapter are minimum guidelines for performance require-
ments, design and installation of emergency lighting. It is consultant’s responsibility 
to refer to NFPA 101, NFPA 70, NFPA 110 and Manufacturer’s design guidelines for 
detailed design and performance requirements. 

 
2.2.4.  Proper planning shall be exercised by consultant to consider the emergency lighting 
requirements of the facility during design stage itself. Ignoring appropriate selection 
of system, Luminaire selection based on lumen output, spare capacity, wiring re-
quirements and lux requirements can prove to be costly in the later stages of pro-
ject. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 407 of 1348 

3. Types of Emergency Lighting Systems 

 

3.1. General Requirements of Emergency Lighting  

3.3.1.  The general requirements of emergency lighting shall be as per Table 6.1. 

Table 6.1: General Requirements of Emergency Lighting 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  PRE-DESIGN     

i. 

CONSIDERA-
TIONS 

 
(LOCATIONS OF 
EMERGENCY             
LIGHTING                    
LUMINAIRE) 

2.  LUX                         
REQUIREMENTS 

Locate the number of emergency luminaries required in the facility by identi-
fying locations such as at exit doors, outside exit stairs, inside exit stairs, at 
change in elevation on walking path, at walking path intersections, near fire 
fighting equipment, circulation areas, refuge areas, exit access corridors, exit 
corridors etc. 
Every landing of each stair shall have emergency luminaire. 

ii. 
iii.  Every change in direction of the exit corridor, walking path shall have emer-

gency luminaire. 

iv.  Outside exit stair at the discharge level shall be provided with emergency lu-

v. 

minaire. 
Every Fire Hose Cabinet (FHC) in the corridor shall be within 2m of  emergen-
cy luminaire. 

vi.  Every First Aid Box shall be within 2m of the emergency luminaire. 
vii.  Every Exit Sign that is intended to be externally illuminated, requires emer-

gency luminaire within 2m. 

viii.  Additional emergency luminaires shall be required at toilets, elevators, car 

parks, escalators, plant rooms, fire pump rooms etc. See Table 6.6. 

i.  Each compartment greater than 280 m2 shall have two luminaires, so that fail-
ure of one does not compromise the emergency illumination of the room and 
exit doors. 

ii.  Emergency lighting shall provide an initial illumination not less than 1.1 lux at 
any point, measured at floor level along the egress path, or 1 m width of cen-
ter line of this egress path. 

iii.  Lux level shall be permitted to decline to not less than 0.65 lux at the end of, 3 

Hours, at any point, measured at floor level along the egress path, or 1 m 
width of center line of this egress path. 

iv.  The average initial illumination at floor level along the egress path, or 1 m 

width of center line of this egress path, shall not be less than 10.8 lux. 

v.  Maximum to minimum ratio of illumination shall not exceed 40 to 1 (40:1) 
vi.  Open areas that are not exit routes and where illumination is provided to 

avoid panicking of people due to darkness, lux level shall be permitted to be 
declined to 0.5 lux, at the end of 3 Hours, at any point. 

vii.  High risk areas, where operations need to be shut-down or terminated safely, 

the initial average lux level shall not be less than 12 lux with no point in the 
area having lux level of less than 1.8 lux, at floor level. 

3. DURATION 

i.  Emergency lighting shall be available for 3 Hours (180 minutes) immediately 

ii. 

after the power failure. 
Initial illumination shall not be less than be 1.1 lux at any point, measured at 
floor level along the egress path, or 1 m width of center line of this egress 
path, (as per Table 6.1.2.). 

iii.  Illumination shall be permitted to decline to not less than 0.65 lux at the end 
of 3 Hours at any point, measured at floor level along the egress path, or 1 m 
width of center line of this egress path (as per Table 6.1.2.) 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 408 of 1348 

 

 

Figure 6.1.:  Locations of Mandatory Emergency Lighting Luminaires 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 409 of 1348 

 

Table 6.1: General Requirements of Emergency Lighting 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

4.  DISTRIBUTION 

OF LUMINARIES 

i.  All emergency lighting luminaires (fixtures) shall be dedicated, marked with 
the maximum lamp wattage or electrical rating, manufacturer’s name, trade-
mark, or other suitable means of identification. 

ii.  Distribution of emergency luminaries shall be based on authenticated lumi-

naire spacing tables from manufacturer or shall be calculated from manufac-
turer’s listed software calculating the spacing based on photometric tests. 
iii.  Consultant shall furnish the calculations and lux distribution printouts from 

manufacturer’s software and design approaches. 

iv.  As a minimum guideline, the spacing of the emergency lighting luminaires in 

exit routes, exit corridors, escape routes, exit stairs, exit access corridors, 
where required minimum lux is 1.1 lux at any point at floor level along the 
egress path, shall not be less than that required by Table 6.1.a. 

v.  As a minimum guideline, the spacing of the emergency lighting luminaires in 
open areas, where the lux level at any point at floor level is permitted to be 
declined to 0.5 lux, shall not be less than that required by Table 6.1.b. 

vi.  However, these guidelines are for reference only. actual spacing shall be from 
manufacturer’s tested and authorized spacing tables. Consultant shall clearly 
mention “H, D1, D2, D3, D4, D5” distances in the design drawings for approval 
with manufacturer’s table and software calculation for justifications. 

Table 6.1.a.: Spacing of Emergency Lighting Luminaires at Exit routes and Corridors (1.1 lux) 

MOUNTING 
HEIGHT 
H 

TRANSVERSE 
TO WALL 
D1 

TRANSVERSE TO 
TRANSVERSE 
D2 

AXIAL TO 
WALL 
D3 

AXIAL TO   
AXIAL 
D4 

TRANSVERSE 
TO AXIAL 
D5 

1. 2.5 m 

2. 3 m 

3. 4 m 

4. 6 m 

2.7 m 

2.5 m 

2.1 m 

2 m 

7.2 m 

7.3 m 

7.5 m 

5.3 m 

1.5 m 

1.6 m 

1.7 m 

1.8 m 

4.6 m 

4.7 m 

4.8 m 

3.7 m 

3.65 m 

3.6 m 

3.45 m 

3.3 m 

Table 6.1.b.: Spacing of Emergency Lighting Luminaires at Open Spaces (0.5 lux) 

MOUNTING 
HEIGHT 
H 

TRANSVERSE 
TO WALL 
D1 

TRANSVERSE TO 
TRANSVERSE 
D2 

AXIAL TO 
WALL 
D3 

AXIAL TO   
AXIAL 
D4 

TRANSVERSE 
TO AXIAL 
D5 

1. 2.5 m 

2. 3 m 

3. 4 m 

4. 6 m 

2.5 m 

2.5 m 

2.6 m 

2.4 m 

8.5 m 

9 m 

9.8 m 

10.3 m 

2.3  m 

1.6 m 

2.3 m 

1.6 m 

7.4 m 

8 m 

8.6 m 

9.5 m 

4.95 m 

6.25 m 

3.6 m 

3 m 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 410 of 1348 

 

Figure 6.2.:  Distances between luminaires with reference to Table 6.1.a. and 6.1.b. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 411 of 1348 

3.2. Requirements for Central Battery Emergency Lighting  

3.2.1.  The requirements of Central Battery emergency lighting shall be as per Table 6.2. 

Table 6.2: Specifications of Central Battery Emergency Lighting 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  TYPE OF         

POWER 

2. BATTERIES 

i.  The type of power available from central battery systems shall be at least Type 
10, Class 1.5, Level 1 in accordance with NFPA 111, Standard on Stored Electri-
cal Energy Emergency and Standby Power Systems. 

ii.  The power System of the central battery system shall be of Type 10 which cut-in 

within 10 seconds of the failure of the mains. 

iii.  The duration of the back-up of central battery power shall be of Class 3, that is 

for 3 hours (180 Minutes) 

iv.  Power supply shall be of level 1 category which is installed where failure of the 
equipment to perform could result in loss of life. (Threat to building Life Safety) 

i.  Batteries shall be central battery systems as follows.                                                      
a. Open-rack type.                                                                                                                 
b. Console or package type.                                                                                                 
c. a combination of a and b. 

ii.  The (ECE) energy conversion equipment shall be restricted to                                    
a. UPS (Uninterruptible Power Supply)                                                                             
b. Central Battery System 

iii.  The equipment, ECE, Battery Unit shall be certified by the manufacturer with 
test certificates, stating the compliance with required output voltages, wave-
form, frequency, operating temperature range etc. 

iv.  Operating temperature for indoor unit shall be 100C TO 400C. 
v.  For outdoor units, operating temperature shall be –340C to 500C. (or the maxi-

mum forecast outdoor temperature) 

vi.  The ECE shall be designed to function at humidity from 5% to 95%. 
vii.  The ECE shall have the capacity to supply energy for 180 minutes, uninterrupt-

ed. 

viii. Following a full discharge after 180 minutes of full rated operation, ECE shall be 
capable of automatically resupplying the full rated load and full duration within 
48 hours and of resupplying 60% of duration at full rated load within 24 hours. 

ix.  Batteries shall be tested and approved for central battery emergency lighting 

system. 

3.  BATTERY 
ROOM       
VENTILATION 

 

i.  Vented batteries, such as nickel cadmium and flat plate lead acid emit potential-

ii. 

ly explosive gases under charge conditions. Therefore it is important when se-
lecting rooms for emergency lighting central battery systems with these types 
of battery, to calculate the amount of ventilation (Air Changes per Hour) re-
quired. 
 The required number of air changes per hour (A) is given by the following for-
mula:                                                                                                                                                                
A = 0.045 x N x I x V  Where:                                                                                                         
N = Number of cells in the battery                                                                                            
V = Volume of room in cubic meters                                                                                                         
I = Charge rate in Amperes 

iii.  This formula will give the number of air changes per hour required during boost 
charge conditions. On float charge (systems are on float charge for most of their 
service life), the amount of gas emitted is approximately 1.5% of that liberated 
whilst on boost charge and under most circumstances this will be dissipated by 
natural ventilation, and will not present a hazard. However, the boost charge 
condition shall be allowed for at the design stage to ensure the appropriate de-
cision on ventilation requirements is made.  

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 412 of 1348 

 

Table 6.2: Specifications of Central Battery Emergency Lighting 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

4. SPARE                  

i.  With any central battery system it is important to bear in mind that it is difficult to 

CAPACITY 

extend the system at a later date unless capacity has been allowed for at the design 
stage.  

ii.  5% spare capacity shall be included when selecting the central battery system rating. 

5.  CONTROL           

FEATURES 

1.  GENERAL 
 
i.  The control equipment and accessories shall be tested and approved by the laborato-

ries for Central battery system. The same shall be approved and registered by Civil 
Defence. 

ii.  System shall be addressable, self diagnostic and automatic testing of luminaires. 
iii.  Control unit operating temperature for indoor application shall be 100C TO 400C. 
iv.  For outdoor applications, operating temperature of the control unit shall be     –340C 

to 500C. (or the maximum forecast outdoor temperature) 

 
 
2.  MONITORING 
 
i.  The load source shall be monitored for undervoltage and overvoltage on all of its un-

grounded input lines.  

ii.  The ECE and the utility shall be monitored for unacceptable conditions.  
iii.  If a condition that is out of tolerance is sensed, the transfer switch shall automatically 

switch to the alternate source(s) of power, provided that the alternate source(s) of 
power itself is within tolerance. 

iv.  When the preferred source of power returns to levels of output within equipment 
tolerance in its sensed parameters, the transfer switch shall initiate an automatic 
retransfer to the preferred source. 

v.  An adjustable time delay shall be allowed to ensure that the preferred source is with-

in its steady-state specification limits before such retransfer is performed. 

vi.  Provision for retransfer to the preferred source also shall be available under manual 

command, provided the preferred source is within tolerance. 

vii.  Retransfer shall be permitted to be sequenced if desired to pick up heavy loads with-

out introducing further disturbances. 

 
3. INTERLOCKING 
 
i. 

Interlocking shall be provided to prevent inadvertent interconnection of the pre-
ferred and alternate power sources 

 
4. TRANSFER SWITCH 
 
i.  Automatic transfer switches shall be listed for emergency service as a completely 

factory-assembled and factory tested apparatus, and shall be electrically or electroni-
cally operated rated for all classes of load to be served.  

ii.  Automatic transfer switches shall be integral part of approved ECE System. 
iii. 

Instruction and equipment shall be provided for the manual nonelectric transfer or 
bypass in the event the automatic transfer switch malfunctions. 

 
5. TEST SWITCH 
 
i.  A test switch shall be provided on each automatic transfer switch that simulates fail-

ure of the preferred power source. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 413 of 1348 

Table 6.2: Specifications of Central Battery Emergency Lighting 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

5.  CONTROL           

FEATURES 

6. INTERFACE 
 
i.  Central Battery System shall be interfaced with Building Monitoring System, comput-

ers and the Fire Alarm control unit. 

6. LUMINAIRE 

i.  Central battery emergency lighting luminaires shall be listed and approved 

for the purpose. 

ii.  Convertible light fittings shall not be permitted, unless approved and listed 

with test certification. 

iii.  All emergency lighting luminaires (fixtures) shall be dedicated, marked with 
the maximum lamp wattage or electrical rating, manufacturer’s name, trade-
mark, or other suitable means of identification. 

7. EXIT SIGNS 

i.  Where Exit signs are internally illuminated with central battery emergency 
lighting system (maintained type), the exit sign designs and specifications 
shall comply with Chapter 5. Exit Signs. 

8. WIRING 

i.  Wiring of all the central battery system shall be 2 hour fire rated, through-

out. Wiring shall be permitted to be wired in the same raceway of Emergen-
cy Systems but shall be totally independent of all other wiring and equip-
ment.  

9. CROSS ZONING 

i.  Central battery luminaires shall be fed by minimum of two circuits in each 

zone of coverage. 

ii.  Each area shall be covered by central battery luminaire in cross zoned ar-

rangement, overlapping each area by luminaires from two different circuits. 

10. FIRE PROTECTION  i.  Central Battery Room shall be protected with Automatic Clean Agent System 

as per Chapter 9. Fire Protection Systems. 

Figure 6.5:  Typical Central Battery Emergency Lighting  

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 414 of 1348 

3.3. Requirements of Monitored Type Self-contained Emergency 

Lighting  

3.3.1.  The requirements of Monitored Type Self contained emergency lighting shall be as 

per Table 6.3. 

Table 6.3: Specifications of Monitored Type Self-contained Emergency Lighting 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  TYPE OF POWER 

i.  The type of power systems for Monitored type Self contained shall be at least 

Type 10, Class 3, Level 1 in accordance with NFPA 111, Standard on Stored 
Electrical Energy Emergency and Standby Power Systems. 

ii.  The power System of the monitored type self contained system shall be of 

Type 10 which cut-in within 10 seconds of the failure of the mains. 

iii.  The duration of the back-up of self contained battery power shall be of Class 

3, that is for 3 hours (180 Minutes) 

iv.  Power supply shall be of level 1 category which is installed where failure of 
the equipment to perform could result in loss of life. (Threat to building Life 
Safety) 

1. BATTERIES 
 
i.  Batteries shall be integral part of the luminaire, as ’self contained unit’.  
ii.  The luminaire, internal ECE and internal Battery Unit shall be certified by the 
manufacturer with test certificates, stating the compliance with required out-
put voltages and operating temperature range etc. 

iii.  Operating temperature for indoor unit shall be 100C TO 400C. 
iv.  For outdoor units, operating temperature shall be –340C to 500C. (or the max-

imum forecast outdoor temperature) 

v.  The self contained unit shall be designed to function at humidity from 5% to 

95%. 

vi.  The self contained emergency lighting unit shall have the capacity to supply 

energy for 180 minutes, uninterrupted. 

vii.  Following a full discharge after 90 minutes of full rated operation, the self 
contained unit shall be capable of automatically resupplying the full rated 
load and full duration within 48 hours and of resupplying 60% of duration at 
full rated load within 24 hours. 

viii. Batteries shall be tested and approved for self contained emergency lighting 

system. 

 
2. BATTERY REPLACEMENT 
 
i.  Batteries shall be replaced as per manufacturer’s recommendation but shall 

not exceed 4 years. 

 
3. LUMINAIRES 
 
i. 
ii.  Luminaire shall be tested and certified by the manufacturer for serving as a 

Luminaires shall be addressable. 

unit in monitored type self contained emergency lighting system.  

iii.  Convertible light fittings shall not be permitted, unless approved and listed 

with test certification. 

iv.  All emergency lighting luminaires (fixtures) shall be dedicated, marked with 
the maximum lamp wattage or electrical rating, manufacturer’s name, trade-
mark, or other suitable means of identification. 

2.  SELF CONTAINED 

LUMINAIRES 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 415 of 1348 

 

Table 6.3: Specifications of Monitored Type Self-contained Emergency Lighting 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

4. SPARE  CAPACITY 

i.  Any Emergency lighting system should be able to expand its network during 

later stage of the building life and it should be considered during design 
stage.  

ii.  5% spare capacity shall be included when selecting the monitored type self 

contained emergency lighting system. 

5.  MONITORING 

FEATURES 

1.  GENERAL 
 
i.  The control equipment, self contained luminaire and accessories shall be 

tested and approved by the laboratories as an assembly and as a “system” 
to be acceptable as Monitored Type self contained emergency lighting sys-
tem. 

ii.  System shall be addressable, self diagnostic and automatic testing of lumi-

iii.  Control unit operating temperature for indoor application shall be 100C TO 

naires. 

400C. 

iv.  For outdoor applications, operating temperature of the control unit shall be     

–340C to 500C. (or the maximum forecast outdoor temperature) 

 
 
2.  MONITORING 
 
i.  The load source shall be monitored for undervoltage and overvoltage on all 

of its ungrounded input lines.  

ii.  Monitoring control unit shall automatically diagnose the health of batteries, 

battery output, luminary output level, circuit integrity.  

iii.  Any abnormality in charging unit, mains supply, circuitry, low battery etc. 

shall be signaled as specific trouble indication on the control unit. 

 
3. TESTING 
 
i.  All the connected self contained luminaries shall be able to be tested and 

perform ‘walk test’ through central monitoring unit. 

ii.  A test feature shall be available that simulates failure of the mains power 

supply. 

 
4. INTERFACE 
 
i.  Monitored type self contained system shall be interfaced with the Building Monitoring 

System, computer and the Fire Alarm control unit. 

6. EXIT SIGNS 

i.  Where Exit signs are internally illuminated with self contained emergency 
lighting system (maintained type), the exit sign designs and specifications 
shall comply with Chapter 5. Exit Signs. 

7. WIRING 

i.  Wiring of all the self contained luminaires into central monitoring unit shall 

not be required to be fire rated. 

8. CROSS ZONING 

i.  Not required 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 416 of 1348 

 

Figure 6.6:  Typical Monitored Type Self Contained  Emergency Lighting System  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 417 of 1348 

3.4. Requirements of Stand alone Self-contained Emergency 

Lighting  

3.4.1.  The requirements of stand alone Self contained emergency lighting shall be as per 

Table 6.4. 

Table 6.4: Specifications of Stand alone Self-contained Emergency Lighting 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  SELF CONTAINED 

LUMINAIRES 

1. POWER 
 
i.  The type of power systems available from stand alone Self contained lumi-

naire shall be at least Type 10, Class 3, Level 1 in accordance with NFPA 111, 
Standard on Stored Electrical Energy Emergency and Standby Power Sys-
tems. 

ii.  The stand alone self contained luminaire shall be of Type 10 which cut-in 

within 10 seconds of the failure of the mains. 

iii.  The duration of the back-up of stand alone self contained battery power shall 

be of Class 3, that is for 3 hours (180 Minutes) 

iv.  Power supply shall be of level 1 category which is installed where failure of 
the equipment to perform could result in loss of life. (Threat to building Life 
Safety) 

 
2. BATTERIES 
 
i.  Batteries shall be integral part of the luminaire, as ’self contained unit’.  
ii.  The luminaire, internal ECE and internal Battery Unit shall be certified by the 
manufacturer with test certificates, stating the compliance with required out-
put voltages and operating temperature range etc. 

iii.  Operating temperature for indoor unit shall be 100C TO 400C. 
iv.  For outdoor units, operating temperature shall be –340C to 500C. (or the max-

imum forecast outdoor temperature). 

v.  The self contained unit shall be designed to function at humidity from 5% to 

95%. 

vi.  The self contained emergency lighting unit shall have the capacity to supply 

energy for 180 minutes, uninterrupted. 

vii.  Following a full discharge after 90 minutes of full rated operation, the self 
contained unit shall be capable of automatically resupplying the full rated 
load and full duration within 48 hours and of resupplying 60% of duration at 
full rated load within 24 hours. 

viii. Batteries shall be tested and approved for self contained emergency lighting 

system. 

 
3. BATTERY REPLACEMENT 
 
i.  Batteries shall be replaced as per manufacturer’s recommendation but shall 

not exceed 4 years. 

 
4. LUMINAIRES 
 
i. 

Luminaire shall be tested and certified by the manufacturer for serving as a 
stand alone type self contained emergency lighting system.  

ii.  All emergency lighting luminaires (fixtures) shall be dedicated, marked with 
the maximum lamp wattage or electrical rating, manufacturer’s name, trade-
mark, or other suitable means of identification. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 418 of 1348 

4. Selection and Application of Emergency Lighting Systems 

 

4.1.  All the emergency lighting systems shall be designed and shall comply with general require-

ments of Table 6.1. 

 
4.2.  Where central battery or monitored type emergency lighting is required by Table 6.5., a cen-
tralized Emergency Lighting system shall be provided for the entire facility, to be under one 
facility management, covering all individual tenants, offices, shops, mercantile units, ware-
houses etc. Buildings shall not be provided with multiple control equipment, multiple battery 
storage banks, serving individual tenants. 

 
4.3. 

The selection of emergency lighting system for occupancies shall be in accordance with     
Table 6.5. 

 
4.4.  Applicability of emergency lighting luminaires at various locations, shall be as per Table 6.6. 

Table 6.5: Selection of Emergency Lighting Systems 

OCCUPANCY 

REQUIREMENTS 

 
OR 
 
i.  Monitored Type Self Contained Emergency Lighting System as per            

Section 3.3., complete with dedicated control and monitoring equipment 
along with computer interfacing shall be provided. 

i.  Monitored Type Self Contained Emergency Lighting System as per             
Section 3.3., complete with dedicated control and monitoring equipment 
along with computer interfacing shall be provided. 

i. 

i. 

Emergency Lighting is Not Mandatory. However, emergency lighting is re-
quired for basements, if any. 

Stand alone Self Contained Emergency Lighting System as per Section 3.4., 
shall be provided and permitted. 

1.  SUPER HIGHRISE 

i. 

Central Battery Emergency Lighting System as per Section 3.2., complete 
with dedicated control equipment and computer interfacing shall be pro-
vided. 

BUILDINGS 

2.  HIGHRISE       

BUILDINGS 

3.  MALL 
4.  AMUSEMENT 

BUILDINGS 

5.    MIDRISE        

BUILDINGS 

6.    LOW RISE         

BUILDINGS 

7.    WAREHOUSES 
8.    FACTORIES 

9.    PRIVATE VILLAS 
10.  COMMERCIAL    

VILLAS 

11.  BUSINESS, 

GROUP C 

12.  MERCANTILE, 

GROUP C 

13.  FUEL DISPENS-
ING STATIONS 
(MINI MARTS, 
RESTAURANTS, 
SERVICE         
STATIONS ) 

14.  PRIVATE AND 
COMMERCIAL 
VILLA                
BASEMENT 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 419 of 1348 

 

Table 6.6: Applicability of Emergency Lighting Luminaire 

OCCUPANCY 

REQUIREMENTS 

i.  Emergency Lighting Luminaire is mandatory. 

i.  Emergency Lighting Luminaire is NOT mandatory. 

1. 

2. 

INSIDE FIRE PUMP ROOM, EPS ROOM 
AND LARGE PLANT ROOMS 
INSIDE AND OUTSIDE EMERGENCY 
COMMAND CENTER 
INSIDE AND OUTSIDE STAIRWAYS 
INSIDE LIFT LOBBY 
INSIDE FIRE FIGHTERS LIFT LOBBY 
IN EXIT CORRIDORS 
INSIDE EXIT ACCESS CORRIDORS 
INSIDE EXIT PASSAGEWAYS 
INSIDE TUNNELS 

3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10.  ALL AREAS OF ENCLOSED BASEMENTS 

AND RAMPS 

11.  IN SERVICE CORRIDORS 
12.  OUTSIDE EXIT DISCHARGE 
13.  RECEPTION 
14.  LOCATION OF FACP 
15.  LOCATION OF FIRE HOSE CABINET 
16.  LOCATION OF FIRE EXTINGUISHER 
17.  LOCATION OF FIRST AID KIT 
18.  LOCATION OF SMOKE CONTROL PANEL 
19.  LPG TANK LOCATION 
20.  INSIDE HOTEL GUEST ROOM 
21.  ASSEMBLY SEATING AREAS 
22.  INSIDE COMMERCIAL KITCHEN 
23.  KITCHEN DELIVERY AREAS 
24.  INDOOR LOADING AND UNLOADING 

AREAS 

25.  INSIDE LV ROOM 
26.  INSIDE TRANSFORMER ROOM 
27.  INSIDE WASH ROOMS 

28. SCHOOL CLASS ROOMS 
29. INSIDE PATIENT  SLEEPING ROOMS 
30. INSIDE PRISON CELLS 
31. SCHOOL OPEN CORRIDORS 
32. OFFICES LESS THAN 60 m2 
33. INSIDE GARBAGE ROOMS 
34. INSIDE TYPICAL FLOOR ELECTRICAL 
ROOMS 
35. INSIDE TYPICAL FLOOR TELEPHONE 
ROOMS 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 420 of 1348 

5. Design, Installation, Inspection and Maintenance of Exit 

Signs and Directional Signs 

 

 

5.1.  Design/Specification and Submittals 

 

5.1.1.  Design, Specifications and Submittals to Civil Defence for approval shall be main 
consultants responsibility. Consultant shall have competent and knowledgeable 
personnel to understand the Civil Defence requirements and codes and standards. 

 
5.1.2.  Design submittals shall be complete with appropriate selection of Emergency 

lighting system, design calculations showing the spacing criteria from manufactur-
er, lumen output and spacing software printouts, location of emergency lighting 
units and layouts. 

 
5.1.3. 

 

Consultant proposal shall comply with manufacturer’s specifications and this chap-
ter. 

5.2.  Installation 

5.2.1. 

 
5.2.2. 

 
5.2.3. 

 
5.2.4. 

 
5.2.5. 

 

Installation of Emergency Lighting Systems shall be carried out only by Civil De-
fence approved and licensed contractors. General contractors, MEP Contractors, 
Electrical contractors, BMS Contractors, Home automation Contractors, Fit out 
contractors shall not be allowed to install Emergency Lighting Systems. 

Installation contractor qualification and approval from Civil Defence is based on 
their training from respective system manufacturers, experience, understanding of 
codes and standards and workmanship. 

Installation contractors shall apply to Civil Defence and secure passing marks in 
Civil Defence examination to gain license and be qualified as “approved Emergency 
Lighting Systems contractors”. 

Installation contractor shall not commence work on site without receiving Civil De-
fence stamped and approved drawings from the Consultant. 

It is contractors responsibility to adhere to consultant’s Civil Defence approved 
drawings, Manufacturer’s installation guidelines and specifications along with the 
requirements of this chapter. 

5.3.  Inspection and Acceptance 

Inspection and acceptance shall be main consultant’s responsibility. 

5.3.1. 
 
5.3.2.  Main consultant shall inspect contractor work during installations and ensure that 
Emergency Lighting locations and actual lux  available on floor is as per approved 
drawings and calculations. 

 
5.3.3. 

 

Consultant shall handover system inspection report, maintenance manuals to the 
owner. 

5.4.. Inspection and Maintenance 

 

5.4.1. 

The building owner, his appointed representative and the facility management 
shall be responsible to ensure that the Emergency lighting system is inspected reg-
ularly and maintained to ensure its good working condition. 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 421 of 1348 

6. Emergency Lighting Systems Acceptance Test 

 

6.1. 

The emergency lighting systems shall be tested as per Table 6.7. for acceptance. 

Table 6.7: Acceptance Test for Emergency Lighting 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. LOCATION 

2.  TRANSFER 
AND LOAD 

i. 

ii. 

i. 

Verify the number and locations of emergency lighting luminaire as per ap-
proved drawings. 
Ensure all the locations required by Table 6.1.1 are implemented on site. 

Upon completion of the installation, the system shall be tested to ensure con-
formity with the requirements of this chapter, NFPA 70, NFPA 110 and NFPA 
111 with respect to both power output and function. 

ii.  With the batteries fully charged and with a connected load bank at rated val-
ue, a normal power failure shall be initiated by opening all switches or break-
ers supplying the normal power to that load. 

iii.  For an emergency load that is not normally energized, the breakers to the 

monitored circuit that energizes the emergency load shall be opened. 

iv.  The time delay between initiation of the power failure and the energizing of 

v. 

the load shall be observed and recorded. 
The voltage and current supplied to the emergency load and, where applica-
ble, the frequency, waveform, and transients shall be recorded. 

vi.  The load test shall be continued for 15 minutes and the following shall be ob-

served and recorded: a. Voltage and current to the load b. Voltage and current 
of the battery bank c. Where applicable, the frequency 

vii.  The normal power shall be restored to the monitored circuit. 
viii.  The transfer time shall be observed. 
ix. 

Immediately following the test the system shall be connected to the normal 
power for 24 hours. 

i. 

ii. 

The emergency illumination available at floor level, at the centerline of exit 
routes and open spaces shall be measured.  
The initial lux shall not be less than an average of 10.8 lux, and at any point not less 
than 1.1 lux, measured at floor level along the egress path, or 1 m width of center line of 
this egress path. 

iii.  The lux shall permitted to decline to not less than 0.65 at the end of, 3 Hours at 

3.  LUX 

4. BATTERY 

ROOM 

5. SELF TEST 

iv. 

i. 

i. 

any point, measured at floor level along the egress path, or 1 m width of cen-
ter line of this egress path.  
Lux shall not be less than 0.5 at open spaces. 

For central battery emergency lighting systems, battery room ventilation, 
proper storage arrangement shall be verified. 

The self diagnostic test shall be conducted through the control unit or comput-
er and recorded. 

6. HANDING 

i.  Operating, Inspection, Maintenance and Battery usage manuals along with 

OVER 

approved drawings shall be handed over to the owner of the building from the 
consultant. 
Inspection report signed by Consultant, Contractors and Owner’s representa-
tives. 

ii. 

iii.  Civil Defence NOC and completion certificates shall be handed over to the 

 

owner. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 422 of 1348 

7. Inspection and Maintenance of Emergency Lighting 

 

7.1. 
 
 

The emergency lighting systems shall be inspected as per Table 6.8. 

 

Table 6.8: Inspection and Maintenance 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. MONTHLY 

i. 

ii. 

iii. 

Functional test shall be conducted every month for 30 seconds of simulation of 
mains failure. 
For central battery and monitored type emergency lighting systems, self diag-
nostic “walk-through” test shall be conducted through control unit or comput-
er and ensure that circuit integrity, battery and charger health and luminaire 
output are satisfactory. 
Luminaire output, battery and charger health, circuit integrity etc. shall be rec-
orded. 

iv.  The battery and associated charger/control equipment shall be checked to ver-

ify that they are in a clean and satisfactory condition and that no exceptional 
environmental or other conditions exist that could damage or affect perfor-
mance. 
Battery electrolyte levels shall be checked, where applicable, and refilled as 
necessary. 

v. 

vi.  Terminals and intercell connectors shall be cleaned and regreased, if neces-

sary, and cell tops shall be cleaned. 
Individual cell voltages shall be checked and recorded where practical. 

vii. 
viii.  The specific gravity of pilot cells shall be checked and recorded, where applica-

ble. 

ix.  The conditions of the plates and sediment of free-electrolyte, lead–acid batter-

ies in transparent containers shall be noted. 

x.  All indicator lamps, meters, and controls shall be checked to verify that they 

are operating correctly. 

xi.  The load value shall be checked to ensure that it is within the equipment 

rating.   

2.  ANNUALLY 

i. 
ii. 

A functional test shall be conducted annually for minimum of 3 hours. 
The battery shall be discharged fully for 3 hours and availability of lux shall be 
verified. 

iii.  System shall be put back to normal charging condition after 3 hours of func-

tional test. 

iv.  The lux level shall not decline to not less than 0.65 at the end of 3 Hours, at any 

point, measured at floor level along the egress path, or 1 m width of center 
line of this egress path . 

3.  BATTERY     

i. 

Self contained luminaire’s batteries shall be replaced every 4 years. 

REPLACEMENT 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 423 of 1348 

8.  Emergency Lighting Material Test Standards and          

Approval. 

 

8.1. Acceptable Test Standards and criteria 
 

8.1.1.  All the Luminaires, Batteries, Fixtures, Materials, Systems, Assemblies, fittings, 

equipment, Products and Accessories, referred to in this chapter shall be Listed, 
Approved and Registered by the Civil Defence Material Approval Department. 

 
8.1.2.  There is no year of edition mentioned against any test standards. It is the intent of 

Civil Defence to convey to the customers seeking laboratory tests and the test la-
boratories to follow the “LATEST EDITION OF THE TEST STANDARD, AS AND WHEN 
THEY ARE UPGRADED/REVISED/AMENDED, TO THE DATE.” 
 

8.1.3.  Self Contained Emergency Lighting Units 
 

 ANSI/UL 924, Standard for Emergency Lighting and Power Equipment. 

i. 
ii.  EN 60598-2-22, Emergency lighting luminaire 
 

8.1.4.  Monitored Type Emergency Lighting System 
 

i.   UL 924, Standard for Emergency Lighting and Power Equipment 
ii.  EN 62034, Automatic Test Systems for Emergency Lighting and Power Equipment 
 

8.1.5.  Central Battery Emergency Lighting Systems 
 

i.   EN 50171, Standard for Central Battery Systems 
ii.  ANSI/UL 924, Standard for Emergency Lighting and Power Equipment. 
 

8.1.6.  Emergency Lighting Luminaire 
 

i.   EN 60598-1, Emergency Lights, general requirements and tests  
ii.  EN 60598-2-22, Emergency lighting luminaire 

 

 8.1.7.  Exit Signs 
 

 ANSI/UL 924, Standard for Emergency Lighting and Power Equipment. 

i. 
ii.  BS ISO 3864-1, Standard for Fire Safety Signs 
iii. BS 5499-1, Standard for Exit Signs 
 

8.1.8.  Tactile Signs 

 UL 924, Standard for Emergency Lighting and Power Equipment 

 
i. 
 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 424 of 1348 
 

8.1.9.  Fire rated Cable, Certified for 120 minutes 

 
  i. 

ii. 

iii. 

iv. 

v. 

vi. 
vii. 
viii. 
ix. 

x. 
xi. 

EN 50200, Method of test for resistance to fire of unprotected small cables for 
use in emergency circuits 
UL  2196, Standard for Fire Test for Circuit Integrity of Fire-Resistive Power, 
Instrumentation, Control, and Data Cables  
  BS 8434-2, Methods of test for assessment of the fire integrity of electric ca-
bles. Test for unprotected small cables for use in emergency circuits. BS EN 
50200 with a 930° flame and with water spray . 
BS 7629-1, Electric cables. Specification for 300/500 V fire resistant screened 
cables having low emission of smoke and corrosive gases when affected by 
fire. Multicore and multipair cables. 
BS 6387, Test method for resistance to fire of cables required to maintain   
circuit integrity under fire conditions. 
  IEC 60331-1, Tests for electric cables under fire conditions. 
  IEC 60331-2, Tests for electric cables under fire conditions. 
  IEC 60332-2-2, Tests on electric and optical fibre cables under fire conditions. 
  IEC 60332-3-10, Tests on electric and optical fibre cables under fire condi-
tions. 
IEC 60331-2, Tests for electric cables under fire conditions. 
UL 1724, Outline of Investigation for Fire Tests for Electrical Circuit Protective 
Systems. 

xii.  UL 1685, Standard for Vertical-Tray Fire-Propagation and Smoke-Release Test 

for Electrical and Optical-Fiber Cables. 

xiii.  UL 1666, UL 1666 Test for Flame Propagation Height of Electrical and Optical-

Fiber Cables Installed Vertically in Shafts. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 425 of 1348Chapter 7 
EMERGENCY VOICE 
EVACUATION SYSTEMS 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 426 of 1348In this Chapter:
 Tone and decibel requirements

 Specifications for voice evacuation and communication systems 

 Specifications for two-way telephone system 

 Testing and acceptance of EVC systems
 

Intent of the Chapter: 

• 

• 

To provide clear and audible messages through voice speakers such that 
occupants can react and take action swiftly during emergency situations to get 
out of the facility to the point of safety. 
To provide design basis for the emergency voice evacuation and 
communication systems. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 427 of 1348 

In this Chapter : 

Intent of the Chapter 

  Tone and Decibel Requirements 

  Specifications for Voice Evacuation and 

Communication Systems 

  Specifications for Two-way Telephone 

System 

  Testing and Acceptance of EVC Systems 

  To provide clear and audible messages through 

voice speakers such that occupants can react and 
take action swiftly during emergency situations to 
get out of the facility to the point of safety. 

  To provide design basis for the Emergency Voice 

Evacuation and Communication Systems. 

1. Definitions 

1.1. General 

It is a mandatory requirement from Civil Defence. 

1.1.1.  Shall  
 
 
1.1.2.  Should 
 
 
1.1.3.  Listed 
 
 
1.1.4.  Decibels 
 

It is a suggested requirement recommended by Civil Defence but not mandatory. 

Approved and registered by individual Emirates’ Civil Defence material department. 

Decibel (dB) is a measurement unit of sound pressure level, it equals one tenth of a 
Bell, which is the decimal logarithm of ratios between two quantities. 

 

 
 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 428 of 13481.2. Voice Alarm 

 
1.2.1.  Voice Evacuation System/ Voice Alarm Communication System (EVC) 
Dedicated manual or automatic equipment for originating and distributing voice in-
 
structions, as well as alert and evacuation signals pertaining to a fire emergency, to 
the occupants of building . 

 
1.2.2.  Public Address System 
 

An electronic amplification system with a mixer, amplifier, and loudspeakers, used to 
reinforce a given sound and distributing the “sound” to the general public around a 
building. 

  
1.2.3.  Emergency Communication System  
 

A system for the protection of life by indicating the existence of an emergency situa-
tion and communicating information necessary to facilitate an appropriate response 
and action, such as evacuation. 

 
1.2.4.  One-way Emergency Communication System  
 

One-way emergency communications systems are intended to broadcast information, 
in an emergency, to people in one or more specified indoor or outdoor areas. It is in-
tended that emergency messages be conveyed either by audible, visible, or textual 
means, or any combination thereof. 

 
1.2.5.  Two-way Emergency Communication System  
 

Two-way emergency communications systems are divided into two categories, those 
systems that are anticipated to be used by building occupants and those systems that 
are to be used by fire fighters, police, and other emergency services personnel. Two-
way emergency communications systems are used to both exchange information and 
to communicate information such as, but not limited to, instructions, acknowledge-
ment of receipt of messages, condition of local environment, and condition of per-
sons, and to give assurance that help is on the way . 

 
1.2.6.  Mass Notification System  
 

A system used to provide information and instructions to people in a building(s) or 
other space using intelligible voice communications and including visible signals, text, 
graphics, tactile, or other communication methods. 

 
1.2.7.  Auxiliary Alarm Box  
 

An alarm box that can only be operated from one or more remote initiating devices or 
an auxiliary alarm system used to send an alarm to the communications center 

A manually operated device used to initiate a fire alarm signal 

 
1.2.8.  Manual Fire Alarm Box  
 
 
1.2.9.  Alert Tone 
 

An attention-getting signal to alert occupants of the pending transmission of a voice 
message 

 
 
 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 429 of 13481.2. Voice Alarm 

 
1.2.10. Average Ambient Sound Level  
 

The root mean square, A-weighted, sound pressure level measured over the period 
of time that any person is present, or a 24-hour period, whichever time period is the 
lesser. 

 
1.2.11. Communication Center  
 

A building or portion of a building that is specifically configured for the primary pur-
pose of providing emergency communications services or public safety answering 
point (PSAP) services to one or more public safety agencies under the authority or 
authorities having jurisdiction. 

 
1.2.12. Communication Circuit  
 

Any signaling path of an emergency communications system that carries voice, au-
dio, data, or other signals. 

An abnormal condition that poses an immediate threat to life, property, or mission. 

 
1.2.13. Alarm Condition  
 
 
1.2.14. Pre-alarm Condition  
 

An abnormal condition that poses a potential threat to life, property, or mission, and 
time is available for investigation. 

 
1.2.15. Emergency Command Center 
 

The room(s) or area(s) staffed during any emergency event by assigned emergency 
management staff. The room or area contains system communications and control 
equipment serving one or more buildings where responsible authorities receive in-
formation from premises sources or systems or from (higher level) regional or na-
tional sources or systems and then disseminate appropriate information to individu-
als, a building, multiple buildings, outside campus areas, or a combination of these in 
accordance with the emergency response plan established for the premises. The 
room or area contains the controls and indicators from which the ECS (Emergency 
Communication Systems) systems located in the room or area can be manually con-
trolled as required by the emergency response plan and the emergency manage-
ment coordinator. 

 
1.2.16. Mass Notification Priority Mode 
 

The mode of operation whereby all fire alarm occupant notification is superseded   
by emergency mass notification action. 

 
1.2.17. Notification Zone 
 

A discrete area of a building, bounded by building outer walls, fire or smoke com-
partment boundaries, floor separations, or other fire safety subdivisions, in which 
occupants are intended to receive common notification. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 430 of 1348 

2.  Emergency Voice Evacuation or Communication System 

(EVC) 
 

2.1. Intention 

2.1.1.  The provisions of this chapter are to convey building fire alarm signals to people 

through pre-recorded voice messages or through live public address messages on 
building voice speaker system. 

 
2.1.2.  Voice Evacuation or communication systems are a very essential communication 

tools in high rise, Superhighrise, crowded assembly buildings, schools and malls, to 
efficiently manage people during fire and other emergencies. This chapter addresses 
the requirements for proper design and installation of the Emergency Voice Evacua-
tion or Communication System. 

 

2.2. General 

2.2.1.  Pre-recorded Emergency Voice messages 
shall be prepared by people who are fa-
miliar with fire emergency procedures 
and evacuation strategies. 

 
2.2.2.  The pre-recorded voice messages shall be 

both in Arabic and English, in an accent 
which is familiar and intelligible to the peo-
ple of UAE, which is a cosmopolitan with 
more than 165 nationals living in the coun-
try. 

 
2.2.3.  Pre-recorded messages shall be simple and 

to the point.  

 
2.2.4.  Voice messages shall not be generalized to 

all buildings. Voice messages shall be cus-
tomized to specific buildings with specific 
directions or actions to be taken by the occu-
pants.  

Did You Know? 

Pre-recorded messages 

prepared and recorded by 

non-fire professionals, in 

an accent that is limited 

to certain section of the 

population, may fail to 

serve the purpose. 

Voice messages should 

be clear and simple in an 

accent that is intelligible 

to more than 165           

nationalities living in the 

UAE.  

 
2.2.5.  Voice messages shall be automatic. The Emergency Voice Evacuation or Communica-
tion System response shall be an automatic response, upon the receipt of confirmed 
Fire Alarm Signal, be it automatic or manually triggered. 

 
2.2.6. 

 
2.2.7. 

It is consultant’s responsibility to design and execute intelligible voice messages, 
based on acoustic features of the area, ceiling height, sound absorption of materials 
in the area etc., where audible voice messages are delivered as intended to people 
clearly, intelligibly and meaningfully. 

It is consultant’s responsibility to refer to NFPA 1, NFPA 70, NFPA 72, NFPA 101 and 
Manufacturer’s design guidelines for further clarifications and code complaint Emer-
gency Voice Evacuation Systems. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 431 of 1348 

2.3. Sound Basics 

2.3.1.  Sound is created by mechanical vibrations that displace air molecules to create re-
petitive changes in air pressure. The ear detects these changes in air pressure and 
perceives the magnitude as loudness and the frequency as pitch. 

 
2.3.2.  Human normal ear can hear sound ranges from 20 Hz to 20,2000 Hz.  
 
2.3.3.  Human speech frequencies range from 500 Hz to 4000 Hz. 
 
2.3.4.  Pre-recorded messages shall be simple and to the point.  
 
2.3.5.  The sound travels through air. The air molecules themselves do not move very far. 

they simply transfer sound pressure changes into sound waves. Sound waves always 
move away from the sound source such as speakers. 

 
2.3.6.  More power the sound source emits, the wider the sound waves travel. And further 

the sound waves spread, less intense they become. 

 
2.2.7.  As a rule of thumb, sound pressure drops approximately 6 dB for every distance dou-

bled. And sound pressure increases by 3 dB for every doubling of power (Watt). 

AVERAGE AMBIENT SOUND LEVELS FOR INFORMATION 

OCCUPANCY 

1.  ASSEMBLY 

2. BUSINESS 

3. EDUCATIONAL 

4. RESIDENTIAL  

5. MERCANTILE 

6. MECHANICAL ROOMS 

7. STORAGE (WAREHOUSE) 

8. INDUSTRIAL 

AVERAGE AMBIENT SOUND LEVEL  

55 dBA 

55 dBA 

45 dBA 

35 dBA 

40 dBA 

85 dBA 

30 dBA 

80 dBA 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 432 of 1348 

2.4. Emergency Voice Evacuation or Communication System 

(EVC) Specifications  

2.4.1.  The Emergency Voice Evacuation or Communication System requirements shall com-

ply with Table 7.1. 

 

 

Table 7.1: Specifications of Emergency Voice Evacuation or Communication Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  LOCATION 

i. 

EVC control unit shall be next to FACP, at continuously monitored location, 
which is attended by facility management or designated personnel at all times, 
such as reception areas, security guard houses, Central command centres, Fa-
cility monitoring rooms, nurse stations at hospitals etc. See FACP location, 
Chapter 8, Table 8.1.14.1. 

2. VOICE         
MESSAGES 

1.  GENERAL 
 
i. 

Emergency communications systems shall be capable of the reproduction of 
prerecorded, synthesized, or live (e.g., microphone, telephone handset, and 
radio) messages with voice intelligibility.  
Intelligibility is a complex function of the source audio, the acoustic response 
of the architectural features and materials of the immediate vicinity, and the 
dynamics created by the room’s occupants. 

ii. 

iii.  Voice alarm speakers shall be listed and approved by Civil Defence and they 

shall be tested as part of the voice evacuation system. 

iv.  Voice Messages shall be developed for each scenario developed in the emer-

gency response plan. Based on the emergency response plan, emergency mes-
sages shall have content that provides information and instructions to people 
in the building, area, site, or installation. 
Evacuation voice messages shall be preceded and followed by a minimum of 
two cycles of the emergency evacuation signal. 

v. 

vi.  Where the system is used to transmit relocation instructions or other non-

evacuation messages, a continuous alert tone of 3-second to 10-second dura-
tion followed by a message (or messages where multi-channel capability is pro-
vided) shall be automatic, and the sequence shall be repeated at least three 
times to direct occupants in the evacuation signalling zone where the alarm 
initiation originated and other evacuation signalling zones in accordance with 
the building’s fire evacuation plan. 

 
2. MICROPHONE 
 
i.  Where microphones are provided for the live emergency voice messages to be 
delivered, “usage instructions” with schematics shall be posted next to the mi-
crophone with user instructions such as distance that the microphone to be 
held from mouth. 

3. POSITIVE 

i.  Emergency Voice Evacuation or Communication System in Positive Alarm Se-

ALARM          
SEQUENCE 

quence (Delayed Alarm sequence), as per Chapter 8. Table 8.1.14.2. shall be per-
mitted. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 433 of 1348 

 

Table 7.1: Specifications of Emergency Voice Evacuation or Communication Systems 

 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

4.  TONES AND      

1.  TONE 
 
DECIBEL                     
i.  Tone preceding any voice message shall be permitted to be part of the voice 
REQUIREMENTS 

message in occupancies where sleeping risk in involved. 

 
2.  PRIVATE MODE AUDIBILITY 
 
i.  Voice messages in private mode/areas shall be 10 dB above the ambient sound 

level having duration of 60 seconds, measured  1.5 m above the floor area re-
quired to be served using A-weighted scale (dBA). 

 
3.  PUBLIC MODE AUDIBILITY 
 
i.  Voice messages in public mode/areas shall be 15 dB above the ambient sound 
level having duration of 60 seconds, measured  1.5 m above the floor area re-
quired to be served using A-weighted scale (dBA). 

 
4.  SLEEPING AREA AUDIBILITY 
 
i.  Voice messages in sleeping areas shall be 75 dB measured at the pillow level in 

the area required to be served using A-weighted scale (dBA). 

i.  Speakers for the voice evacuation system shall be dedicated, listed, approved 

and tested for the emergency voice evacuation systems. 

ii.  Speakers used as Fire Alarm notification in accordance with Chapter 8, Table 
8.1.16. shall be permitted to be used as voice evacuation speakers, provided 
they comply with this Chapter, Section 2.4. 

iii.  Where speakers are not dedicated, building ancillary function speakers shall 

be permitted to be part of the Voice evacuation system provided they comply 
with voice message intelligibility, circuit integrity, wiring requirements, ad-
dressable etc., as per this Chapter, Section 2.4. 

iv.  Speakers shall be with flashers or strobe light where installed at basements, 

plant rooms and noisy industrial areas. 

v.  Where provided, speakers in each enclosed stairway shall be connected to a 

separate notification zone for manual paging only. 

i.  If acceptable to the authority having jurisdiction, the system shall permit the 
application of an automatic evacuation signal to one or more signalling zones 
and at the same time, shall permit manual voice paging to the other signalling 
zones selectively or in any combination. 

ii.  Undivided, non-compartmentalized  fire or smoke zones of the building shall 

not be divided into multiple voice evacuation signalling zones. 

iii. If multiple notification appliance circuits are provided within a single zone, all 
of the notification appliances within the zone shall be arranged to activate or 
deactivate simultaneously. 

iv. Fire alarm systems used for partial evacuation and relocation shall be designed 
and installed such that attack by fire within an evacuation signalling zone shall 
not impair control and operation of the notification appliances outside the 
evacuation signalling zone.  

5. SPEAKERS 

6. ZONES 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 434 of 1348 

Table 7.1: Specifications of Emergency Voice Evacuation or Communication Systems 

 

 ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

7.  CONTROL SYSTEM  1.  GENERAL 

 
i.  EVC operating instructions shall be posted at the control system. 
ii.  Manual controls shall be arranged to provide visible indication of the on/off 

status for their associated signaling zone. 

iii.  Systems shall be provided with manual voice transmission capabilities selec-

tively to one or more zones or on an all-call basis. 

 
2.  MESSAGE PRIORITY 
 
i.  Voice Evacuation messages shall override previously initiated signals, mes-
sages, music, communication signals etc. to the selected notification zone. 

ii.  If such an initiated recorded Voice Evacuation message is interrupted by live 
voice instructions, upon release of the microphone, the previously initiated 
recorded messages to the selected notification zones shall not resume play-
ing automatically unless triggered again manually or required by the emer-
gency response plan. 

iii.  Fire alarm signals shall be distinctive, clearly recognizable, and, with the ex-
ception of mass notification inputs, take precedence over any other signal 
even when a non–fire alarm signal is initiated first and shall be indicated as 
follows in descending order of priority .                                                                       
a. Signals associated with life safety                                                                             
b. Signals associated with property protection                                                           
c. Trouble signals associated with life and/or property protection                         
d. All other signals 

i.  Ancillary functions (Non-emergency functions) such as Music, Commentary, 

Live shows, general communication messages etc., shall be permitted but 
shall not impair the required operation of the emergency voice evacuation 
or communications system. 

ii.  Loudspeakers used for emergency communications system functions also 

providing ancillary functions shall meet the following conditions.                          
a. The loudspeakers and associated audio equipment are installed or located 
with safeguards to resist tampering or misadjustment of those components 
essential for intended emergency notification.                                                            
b. The monitoring integrity requirements continue to be met while the sys-
tem is used for non-emergency purposes. 

iii.  Ancillary functions shall be inspected and tested annually to verify they will 

not impair the operation of the fire alarm system or the emergency voice 
evacuation system. 

iv.  Where emergency communications systems utilize Class N pathways that are 

also shared Level 1 or Level 2 pathways, as a means to support ancillary 
functions, devices, or interconnected systems , the shared pathways shall 
meet the requirements of Table 7.1. 8. 

8.  ANCILIARY   
FUNCTIONS 

 
(MULTI-PURPOSE,       
MUSIC,                
COMMUNICATIONS 
ETC.) 

9. CIRCUITS AND 

WIRING 

i.  All the voice evacuation system circuits monitoring speakers shall be class A, 

addressable circuits, with redundant pathways. 

ii.  Operational capability continues past a single open, and the single open fault 

shall result in a trouble signal. 

iii.  Conditions that affect the intended operation of the path are annunciated as 

a trouble signal. 

iv.  Operational capability is maintained during the application of a single ground 

fault.  

v.  A single ground condition shall result in the annunciation of a trouble signal. 
vi.  All cables and wiring used for emergency voice evacuation or communication 

systems shall be 2 hour fire rated. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 435 of 1348 

 

Table 7.1: Specifications of Emergency Voice Evacuation or Communication Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

10.  INSTALLATION 

11. INTERFACING 

WITH FACP 

i.  Controls that are intended to be accessed by authorized users such as con-
trol units, including switches, microphone, latches and so forth, shall be lo-
cated above the finished floor a minimum of 910 mm and a maximum of 122 
mm where the horizontal reach is less than 25 cm. 
If a horizontal reach of 25 cm to 61 cm is required, the maximum elevation 
shall be limited to 1070 mm above the finished floor and the minimum ele-
vation shall be limited to 710 mm. 

ii. 

iii.  Text and visual indicators, including lamps, screens, displays, instructions or 
labels, associated with control or operation shall be visible within all points 
of elevation between 1020 mm and 1520 mm above the finished floor. 

i.  A control unit having both Fire Detection and Alarm System (FACP) and 

Emergency Voice Evacuation or Communication System (ECV), combined is 
preferred by Civil Defence. 

ii.  A single dedicated Emergency Voice Evacuation or Communication control 
panel shall also be permitted with interfacing to FACP in compliance to all 
the following requirements. 

iii.  The fire alarm control interface shall coordinate signals to and from each 

system to accomplish the following:                                                                                       
a. Indicate the failure at the system control unit that will be impaired                           
b. Provide an audible and distinctive visible indication at the affected FACP to 
indicate the ECV is active.                                                                                                           
c. Cause the fire alarm system to deactivate all audible and visible notifica-
tion appliances whose operation could interfere with the intelligibility of the 
mass notification message or that will deliver conflicting information to oc-
cupants.                                                                                                                                        
d. Not permit the fire alarm system to turn off audible and visible notifica-
tion appliances for special suppression predischarge notification, if any.                       
e. Connected to Civil Defence 24 X7 monitoring system for activation and 
trouble indication. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 436 of 1348 

2.5. Two-way Communication System (Two-way Telephone      

System) Specifications  

2.5.1.  Two-way Communication System or Two-way Telephone System requirements shall 

comply with Table 7.2. 

Table 7.2: Specifications of Two-way Communication Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. USAGE 

i. 

Two-way Communication Systems or Two-way Telephone Systems shall be pro-
vided for Civil Defence personnel use. And it shall be collocated with the Emer-
gency Voice Evacuation and Communication System. 

2.  LOCATION 

i. 

As a code of practice, Two-way Communication Systems or Two-way Telephone 
Systems shall be common talk (i.e., a conference or party line circuit), providing 
at least one telephone station or telephone jack (Fireman’s Phone Jack), locat-
ed at the following locations.                                                                 a. Inside stair, 
on every floor landing                                                                                                b. 
Inside Fire Lift lobby                                                                                                                            
c. Inside Each elevator car                                                                                                         
d. Inside Fire/Emergency Command Centre                                                                                                       
e. Inside Fire Pump Room                                                                                                                         
f. Inside Area of Refuge, if any. 

ii.  At least two handsets shall be stored at each control centre for use by emer-

gency responders. 

iii.  Each telephone station or telephone jack shall be clearly and permanently la-

beled to allow the caller to identify his or her location to the control center by 
voice. 

1.  GENERAL 
 
i. 

Two-way telephone communications equipment shall be listed  and approved 
for two-way telephone communications service. 

ii.  Monitoring of the integrity of two-way telephone communications circuits shall 

be provided. 

iii.  Two-way telephone communications service shall be capable of permitting the 
simultaneous operation of any five telephone stations in a common talk mode. 
iv.  A notification signal at the control equipment, distinctive from any other alarm, 

supervisory, or trouble signal, shall indicate the off-hook condition of a calling 
telephone circuit. If a selective talk telephone communications service is sup-
plied, a distinctive visible indicator shall be furnished for each selectable circuit 
so that all circuits with telephones off-hook are continuously and visibly indicat-
ed. 

v.  A means for silencing the audible call-in signal sounding appliance shall be per-

mitted, provided that it is key operated or located in a locked cabinet, or pro-
vided with protection to prevent use by unauthorized persons. The means shall 
operate a visible indicator and sound a trouble signal whenever the means is in 
the silence position and no telephone circuits are in an off-hook condition. 
If a selective talk system is used, means mentioned above shall be permitted, 
provided that subsequent telephone circuits going off-hook operate the distinc-
tive off-hook signal. 

vi. 

 

3. FEATURES 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 437 of 1348 

Table 7.2: Specifications of Two-way Communication Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

4. CIRCUITS AND 

i. 

WIRING 

All circuits and wiring necessary for the operation of two-way telephone 
communication systems shall be 2 hour fire rated. 

5.  INSTALLATION 

i.  Wall-mounted telephone appliances or related jacks shall be not less than 
910 mm and not more than 1680 mm above floor level with clear access to 
the appliance that is at least 760 mm wide. 
If accessible to the general public, one telephone appliance per location 
shall be not more than 1220 mm above floor level. 

ii. 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 438 of 1348 

3.   Application of Emergency Voice Evacuation System and 

Two-way Telephone Communication System 
 

3.1.  The application of Emergency Voice Evacuation or Communication System and Two-way Tel-

ephone Communication System shall be as per Table 7.3. 

 
 

 

Table 7.3: Application of Emergency Voice Evacuation or Communication System 

LOCATION 

REQUIREMENTS 

Emergency Voice Evacuation or Communication System (EVC), in accord-
ance with Section 2.4., Shall be provided. 
Tow-way Telephone System, in accordance with Section 2.5., shall be pro-
vided. 

1.  SUPER HIGHRISE 

i. 

BUILDINGS 

2.  HIGHRISE           

ii. 

BUILDINGS 

3.  MALLS 
4.  ASSEMBLY        
OCCUPANCIES 

5.  AMUSEMENT AND 

THEME PARKS 
6.  EDUCATIONAL 
OCCUPANCIES 
7.  HOTEL                
OCCUPANCIES 

8.  DETENTION AND 
CORRECTIONAL 
OCCUPANCIES 
9.  STORAGE AND 
INDUSTRIAL      
OCCUPANCIES   
HAVING BUILT-UP 
AREA MORE THAN 
5000 m2 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 439 of 1348 

4. Design, Installation, Inspection and Maintenance of Emer-
gency Voice Evacuation or Communication and Two-way 
Telephone System 

 

 

4.1. Design/Specification and Submittals 

 

4.1.1.  Design, Specifications and Submittals to Civil Defence for approval shall be main 
consultants responsibility. Consultant shall have competent and knowledgeable 
personnel to understand the Civil Defence requirements and codes and standards. 

 
4.1.2.  Design submittals shall be complete with Emergency Voice Evacuation Speaker 

layouts, ceiling heights and manufacturer’s specification for the spacing of speak-
ers and intelligibility recommendations. 

 

4.2. Installation 

4.2.1. 

 
4.2.2. 

 
4.2.3. 

 
4.2.4. 

 
4.2.5. 

 

Installation of Voice evacuation System and Two-way telephone Systems shall be 
carried out only by Civil Defence approved and licensed Fire Detection and Alarm 
System contractors. General contractors, MEP Contractors, Electrical contractors, 
BMS Contractors, Home automation Contractors shall not be allowed to install 
Voice Evacuation Systems and Two-way telephone Systems. 

Installation contractor qualification and approval from Civil Defence is based on 
their training from respective system manufacturers, experience, understanding of 
codes and standards and workmanship. 

Installation contractors shall apply to Civil Defence and secure passing marks in 
Civil Defence examination to gain license and be qualified as “approved Fire Detec-
tion and Alarm Systems contractors”. 

Installation contractor shall not commence work on site without receiving Civil De-
fence stamped and approved drawings from the Consultant. 

It is contractors responsibility to adhere to consultant’s Civil Defence approved 
drawings and Manufacturer’s installation, acoustic guidelines and specifications. 

4.3. Inspection and Acceptance 

Inspection and acceptance shall be main consultant’s responsibility. 

4.3.1. 
 
4.3.2.  Main consultant shall inspect contractor work during installations and during ac-
ceptance, ensure that Voice speakers are delivering intelligible messages, in ac-
cordance with Section 5. of this chapter. 

 
4.3.2. 

 

Consultant shall handover system inspection report, acoustic reports, approved 
drawings, maintenance manuals to the owner. 

4.4.  Inspection and Maintenance 

 

4.4.1. 

 
4.4.2. 

The building owner, his appointed representative and the facility management 
shall be responsible to ensure that Voice evacuation System and Tw0-way tele-
phone systems are installed in compliance with this chapter. 

Emergency Voice Evacuation System and Two-way telephone systems shall be in-
spected and maintained as per Chapter 8. Fire Detection and Alarm System’s 
schedule and requirements.  

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 440 of 1348 

5. Emergency Voice Evacuation or Communication System 

(EVC) Acceptance Test 

 

5.1. 

 

Intelligibility of Emergency Voice Evacuation or Communication Systems shall comply 
with Table 7.4. 

Table 7.4: Acceptance Test of Emergency Voice Evacuation or Communication Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. ACCEPTANCE TEST 

i. 

ii. 

Speech intelligibility is not a physical quantity like meters, feet, amperes, 
volts, or even decibels. It is a benchmark of the degree to which we under-
stand spoken language, and as such is a complex phenomenon affected by 
many variables 
There are two basic categories of intelligibility testing:                                    
a. Subject (human) based testing                                                                          
b. Instrument based test methods.  

iii.  Test methods that use human subjects are only statistical predictions of 

how well speech might be understood at any other time for any other 
group of listeners. Several subject based test methods have been exten-
sively researched, tested for reliability, and standardized. Examples include 
the Phonetically Balanced (PB) word scores (256 words or 1000 words) and 
Modified Rhyme Test (MRT). 

iv.  Subject based test methods can gauge how much of the spoken infor-

mation is correctly understood by a person or group of persons for that 
particular test. When properly done, that resulting value is a prediction of 
how much of the spoken word will be correctly understood by others at 
some other time. Therefore, the results of speech intelligibility testing are 
usually described as predictions, not measurements. 

v.  However, most users of the instruments refer to the results as measure-

ments, not as predictions. Since the use of portable instruments is the 
more common method in the alarm and emergency communications in-
dustries, in this document the results will be referred to as measurements 
to avoid confusion. However, in scientific and general acoustic literature, 
readers can see the measured values correctly referred to as predictions. 

vi.  Thus acceptance test for Voice evacuation Systems shall be completely 

based on the clear audibility, intelligibility and understanding of the voice 
messages delivered in a particular building. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 441 of 1348 

6.  Emergency Voice Evacuation System and Two-way      

Telephone System Material Test Standards and Approval. 

 

6.1.  Acceptable Test Standards and criteria 
 

6.1.1.  All the Speakers, Voice Equipment, Control Systems, Materials, Assemblies, wiring, 

fittings, Products and Accessories, referred to in this chapter shall be Listed, Ap-
proved and Registered by the Civil Defence Material Approval Department. 

 
6.1.2.  There is no year of edition mentioned against any test standards. It is the intent of 

Civil Defence to convey to the customers seeking laboratory tests and the test la-
boratories to follow the “LATEST EDITION OF THE TEST STANDARD, AS AND WHEN 
THEY ARE UPGRADED/REVISED/AMENDED, TO THE DATE.” 
 

6.1.3.  Emergency Voice Evacuation Systems 
 

 ANSI/UL 2572, Mass Notification Systems. 

i. 
ii.   UL 864, Standard for Control Units and Accessories for Fire Alarm Systems. 
iii.  FM 3010, Fire Alarm Signaling Systems 
iv.  FM 3011, Central Station Service for Fire Alarms and Protective Equipment Su-

pervision. 

v.   EN 54-16, Voice Alarm Control and indicating equipment 
vi.  ISO 7240-16, Voice Alarm Control and indicating equipment 
 

6.1.4.  Speakers 
 

i.   ANSI/UL 1480, Standard for Speaker 
ii.  ULC-S541-07, Standard for Speaker 
iii. FM 3150, Audible Notification Appliances for Automatic Fire Alarm Signaling 
iv.  EN 54-24, Loud Speakers 
v.  ISO 7240-24 Loudspeakers 
 

6.1.5.  Amplifiers  
 

i.   UL 864, Standard for Control Units and Accessories for Fire Alarm Systems 
ii.   UL 1711, Amplifiers for Fire Protective Signaling Systems 
iii.  EN 54-16, Voice Alarm Control and indicating equipment 
 

6.1.6.  2-Way Telephone System 
 

i.   UL 864, Standard for Control Units and Accessories for Fire Alarm Systems 
ii.   EN 54-21, Alarm Transmission and fault warning routing equipment 
 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 442 of 1348 

6.1.7.  Fire rated Cable, Certified for 120 minutes 

  

i. 

EN 50200, Method of test for resistance to fire of unprotected small cables for 
use in emergency circuits 

ii.    UL  2196, Standard for Fire Test for Circuit Integrity of Fire-Resistive Power, In-

strumentation, Control, and Data Cables  

iii.    BS 8434-2, Methods of test for assessment of the fire integrity of electric ca-
bles. Test for unprotected small cables for use in emergency circuits. BS EN 
50200 with a 930° flame and with water spray . 

iv.    BS 7629-1, Electric cables. Specification for 300/500 V fire resistant screened 

cables having low emission of smoke and corrosive gases when affected by fire. 
Multicore and multipair cables. 

v.    BS 6387, Test method for resistance to fire of cables required to maintain cir-

cuit integrity under fire conditions. 
IEC 60331-1, Tests for electric cables under fire conditions. 
IEC 60331-2, Tests for electric cables under fire conditions. 

vi.   
vii.   
viii.    IEC 60332-2-2, Tests on electric and optical fibre cables under fire conditions. 
ix.   
x.       IEC 60331-2, Tests for electric cables under fire conditions. 
xi.      UL 1724, Outline of Investigation for Fire Tests for Electrical Circuit Protective 

IEC 60332-3-10, Tests on electric and optical fibre cables under fire conditions. 

Systems. 

xii.     UL 1685, Standard for Vertical-Tray Fire-Propagation and Smoke-Release Test 

for Electrical and Optical-Fiber Cables. 

xiii.     UL 1666, UL 1666 Test for Flame Propagation Height of Electrical and Optical-

Fiber Cables Installed Vertically in Shafts. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 443 of 1348Chapter 8 
 
FIRE DETECTION 
AND ALARM SYSTEM 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 444 of 1348In this Chapter:
 Definitions of fire detection, alarm equipment, and systems.
  Specifications and design consideration for various fire detection 
and alarm systems,.
Installation,  commissioning,  maintenance  of  fire  detection,  and 
alarm systems. 

Intent of the Chapter 

• 

• 

• 

To provide means of detecting smoke, heat, flame, fire and provide means of 
alarming the occupants at the earliest. 
To  provide  minimum  design,  installation,  commissioning  and  maintenance 
requirements for the fire detection and alarm systems. 
To establish and maintain equipment and material quality. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 445 of 1348Intent of the Chapter 

  To provide means of detecting smoke, heat, flame, fire and 

provide means of alarming the occupants at the earliest. 

  To provide minimum design, installation, commissioning 
and maintenance requirements for the Fire Detection and 
Alarm Systems.  

  To establish and maintain equipment and material quality.  

 

In this Chapter : 

  Definitions of Fire Detection and 

Alarm equipment and systems. 

  Specifications and design 

consideration for various Fire 
Detection and Alarm Systems,  

  Installation, Commissioning and 

Maintenance of Fire Detection and 
Alarm Systems. 

1. Definitions 

1.1.  General 

 

 

 

 

1.1.1.  Shall  

It is a mandatory requirement from Civil Defence 

1.1.2.  Should 

It is a suggested requirement recommended by Civil Defence but not mandatory. 

1.1.3.  Listed 

Approved and registered by individual Emirates’ Civil Defence material department. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 446 of 13481.2.  Types of Smoke and Fire Detectors 

 

1.2.1.  Addressable Device  
 

A fire alarm system component with discrete identification that can have its status indi-
vidually identified or that is used to individually control other functions. 

 
1.2.2.  Air-Sampling Type Smoke Detector or Aspirating Smoke Detector (ASD) 
 

A smoke detection system in which an air sample is drawn from the protected area by a 
ventilator or pump to the central sensor which analyzes the air sample for presence of 
smoke particles. 

 
1.2.3.  Analogue Detector  
 

A device that produces a quantitative signal as per status change in the protected zone, 
and it is unlike the traditional detectors that indicate the On/Off statuses only.  

 
1.2.4.  Combination Detector  
 

A combination that either responds to more that one of the fire phenomena or employs 
more than one operating principle to sense one of these phenomena. Typical examples 
are the combination of a heat detector with a smoke detector or a combination rate of 
rise and fixed temperature heat detector.  

A device used for detecting infrared and ultraviolet rays emitting from flames.  

A device that responds only when its sensitive element heated up reaches a predeter-
mined temperature.  

 
1.2.5.  Flame Detector  
 
 
1.2.6.  Fixed Temperature Detector  
 

 
1.2.7.  Heat Detector  
 
 
1.2.8.  Line-Type Heat Detector  
 

A fire detector that detects either abnormally high temperature or rate of rise, or both.  

A device used for detecting heat in which sensing element is continuous line along a 
certain path, for example heat sensitive cable. 

 
1.2.9.  Multi-State Detector  
 

A device that produces output signals (more than two), to include "Normal”, "Fire 
Alarm" and other abnormal conditions.  

 
1.2.10.  Optical Beam-Type Smoke Detector  
 

A smoke detector comprising a light source and a receiver to detect the obscuration of 
light as a result of smoke alone a line. The transmitter and receiver may be at opposite 
ends or they may be incorporated into a single housing with a reflector at the opposite 
end. 

 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 447 of 13481.2.  Types of Smoke and Fire Detectors 

 

1.2.11.  Optical Beam-Type Smoke Detector  
 

A smoke detector comprising a light source and a receiver to detect the obscuration of 
light as a result of smoke alone a line. The transmitter and receiver may be at opposite 
ends or they may be incorporated into a single housing with a reflector at the opposite 
end. 

 
1.2.12.  Rate-of-Rise Detector  
 

A device that responds when the temperature rate of rises is more than a predeter-
mined level.  

 
1.2.13.  Smoke Detector  
 

A device used for detecting visible and invisible particles of smoke resulting from com-
bustion. Several operating principles are used for detection; examples include; photoe-
lectrical and Ionization spot-type detectors, Air-sampling type and optical beam-type 
smoke detectors.  

A device in which sensitive element is fixed in a certain location.  

 
1.2.14.  Spot-Type Smoke Detector  
 
 
1.2.15.  Gas Detector  
 

A device that detects the presence of a specified gas concentration. Gas detectors can 
be either spot-type or line-type detectors. 

 
1.2.16.  Multi-sensor Detector  
 

A device that contains multiple sensors that separately respond to physical stimulus 
such as heat, smoke, or fire gases, or employs more than one sensor to sense the same 
stimulus. A device capable of generating multiple alarm signals from any one of the sen-
sors employed in the design, independently or in combination. The sensor output sig-
nals are mathematically evaluated to determine when an alarm signal is warranted. The 
evaluation can be performed either at the detector or at the control unit. This device 
has listings for each sensing method employed. 

 
1.2.17.  Radiant Energy sensing Fire Detector  
 

A device that detects radiant energy, such as ultraviolet, visible, or infrared, that is 
emitted as a product of combustion reaction and obeys the laws of optics. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 448 of 1348 

 

1.3.  Fire Detection System 

 

1.3.1.  Addressable System 
 

A system, in which input and output devices have a unique address that can be read, 
recognized and controlled by the control panel.  

 
1.3.2.  Alarm Signal  
 

A signal activated by the alarm system to warn of emergency conditions that require 
immediate action by all occupants of the affected area.  

 

1.3.3.  Alarm Warning  
 

A signal activated by the alarm system to warn of emergency conditions that require 
action by particular people who may (or may not be) occupants of the affected area.  
 

1.3.4.  Alarm Zone  
 

Geographical sub-division of the protected premises, in which the fire alarm warning or 
signal can be given separately, and independently, of a fire alarm warning or signal in 
any other alarm zone. 

 
1.3.5.  Analogue Addressable System  
 
  
1.3.6.  Annunciator  
 

Addressable system that reports quantative status signals rather than two state signals. 

A unit containing one or more indicator lamps, alphanumeric displays or other equiva-
lent means of indication that provides status information about circuit, condition or lo-
cation information from the main control panel.  

 
1.3.7.  Area of voice coverage 
 

Area in which speech signal from voice alarm are sufficiently intelligible and warning 
signals from the system are sufficiently audible.  

 
1.3.8.  Automatic Alarm 
 

Automatic alarm systems that activate auxiliary systems, such as fire fighting system, 
elevators and fire safety system.  

An electro-Mechanical device used to produce audible signals.  

A device used to produce low audible warning without causing panic.  

An alarm system consists of conventional, addressable and analogue systems.  

A component of the fire alarm system, provided with primary and secondary power 
source, which receive signals from initiating devices or other fire alarm control units, 
and processes these signals to determine part or all of the required fire alarm system 
output functions.  

 
1.3.9.  Bell  
 
 
1.3.10.  Buzzer  
 
 
1.3.11.  Combined System  
 
 
1.3.12.  Control Panel  
 

 
 
 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 449 of 13481.3.  Fire Detection System 

 

1.3.13.  Decibel  
 

Decibel (dB) is a measurement unit of sound pressure level, it equals one tenth of a Bell, 
which is the decimal logarithm of ratios between two quantities.  

 
1.3.14.  Emergency Voice Communications (EVC) 
 

A system that is interlinked with the fire alarm to give evacuation or emergency mes-
sages throughout the premises for all occupants. 

 
1.3.15.  Evacuation system  
 

A system intended to evacuate the building occupants to a safe refuge by broadcasting 
alert and evacuation messages.  

 
1.3.16.  Final Voltage of a Battery  
 

The voltage at which the battery is considered depleted. This voltage may be at the 
point where the powered device no longer functions as intended by the manufacturer 
where further discharge may cause erratic operation or may cause irreversible damage 
to the battery or both.  

A funnel-like device used for emitting audible signals different from bell sounds.  

Manual operation device used to activate the fire alarm.  

 
1.3.17.  Horn  
 
 
1.3.18.  Manual Call Point  
 
 
1.3.19.  Manual System  
 

A system that does not contain automatic detectors and whereby the fire alarm may be 
activated only manually.  

 
1.3.20.  Mimic Diagram  
 

A topographic diagram of the protected buildings and its affiliate departments. It con-
sists of electric circuits that activate visual alarm signals connected fire system to indi-
cate alarm location.  

 
1.3.21.  Phased evacuation  
 

A system of evacuation in which different parts of the premises are evacuated in a con-
trolled sequence of phases, those parts of the premises expected to be at greatest risk 
being evacuated first. 

 
1.3.22.  Staged Alarm  
 

A fire alarm system in which two or more stages of alarm warning can be given within a 
given alarm zone before an alarm signal for that zone is triggered.    
 

1.3.23.  Standby Supply  
 

An electrical automatic power supply connected to the fire alarm system and operated 
in case of main supply failure.  

 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 450 of 13481.3.  Fire Detection System 

 

1.3.24.  Voice Alarm system  
 

Dedicated manual or automatic system for originating and distributing of voice instruc-
tions, alert and evacuation signals for the safe evacuation of occupants. This system to 
be used for emergency situation like fire.  

 
1.3.25.  Zone  
 

A part of the protected building which contains one or more fire detectors, the zone is 
defined by a unique alphanumeric which is indicated at the control panel.  

 
1.3.26.  Alarm Repeater System  
 

A device or system for the purpose of automatically retransmitting alarm information 
received by the alarm processing equipment. 

 
1.3.27.  Alarm Verification Feature 
 

A feature of automatic fire detection and alarm systems to reduce unwanted alarms 
wherein smoke detectors report alarm conditions for a minimum period of time, or con-
firm alarm conditions within a given time period after being reset, in order to be accept-
ed as a valid alarm initiation signal. 

 
1.3.28.  Annunciator 
 

A unit containing one or more indicator lamps, alphanumeric displays, or other equiva-
lent means in which each indication provides status information about a circuit, condi-
tion, or location. 

 
1.3.29.  Fire Safety Plan 
 

Documentation that provides information on the use of alarms, transmission of alarms, 
response to alarms, evacuation of immediate area, evacuation of smoke compartment, 
preparation of floors and building for evacuation and extinguishment of fire. 

 
1.3.30.  Abnormal Condition 
 

An abnormal condition that poses an immediate threat to life, property, or mission. 

1.3.31.  Pre-Alarm Condition.  
 

An abnormal condition that poses a potential threat to life, property, or mission, and 
time is available for investigation.  

1.3.32.  Supervisory Condition.  
 

An abnormal condition in connection with the supervision of other systems, processes, 
or equipment. 

1.3.33.  Trouble Condition.  
 

An abnormal condition in a system due to a fault.  

1.3.34.  Normal Condition.  
 

Circuits, systems, and components are functioning as designed and no abnormal condi-
tion exists.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 451 of 13481.3.  Fire Detection System 

 

A component that transmits/ receives and processes wireless signals 

1.3.35.  Wireless Control Unit  
 
 
1.3.36.  Two-Way Emergency Communications System 
 

Two way emergency communications systems are divided into two categories, those 
systems that are anticipated to be used by building occupants and those systems that 
are to be used by fire fighters, police, and other emergency services personnel. Two-
way emergency communications systems are used to both exchange information and to 
communicate information such as, but not limited to, instructions, acknowledgement of 
receipt of messages, condition of local environment, and condition of persons, and to 
give assurance that help is on the way. 

 
1.3.37.  Emergency Command Center 
 

The room(s) or area(s) staffed during any emergency event by assigned emergency 
management staff. The room or area contains system communications and control 
equipment serving one or more buildings where responsible authorities receive infor-
mation from premises sources or systems or from (higher level) regional or national 
sources or systems and then disseminate appropriate information to individuals, a 
building, multiple buildings, outside campus areas, or a combination of these in accord-
ance with the emergency response plan established for the premises. The room or area 
contains the controls and indicators from which the ECS systems located in the room or 
area can be manually controlled as required by the emergency response plan and the 
emergency management coordinator or the Civil Defence personnel. 

 
1.3.38.  Emergency Response Plan 
 

A documented set of actions to address the planning for, management of, and response 
to natural, technological, and man-made disasters and other emergencies. 

 
1.3.39.  Fire Alarm Control Interface 
 

The Fire Alarm control interface coordinates signals to and from the fire alarm system 
and other systems. 

 
1.3.40.  Public Address System 
 

An electronic amplification system with a mixer, amplifier, and loudspeakers, used to 
reinforce a given sound and distributing the “sound” to the general public around a 
building. 

 
1.3.41.  Intrinsically Safe 
 

Intrinsically Safe Design is a design technique applied to electrical equipment and wiring 
for Explosive and hazardous locations where flammable vapors and atmosphere exists. 
The technique is based on limiting energy, electrical and thermal, to a level below that 
required to ignite a specific hazardous atmospheric mixture. It also combines tech-
niques to not release electrically emitted sparks. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 452 of 1348 

2.   Fire Detection and Alarm Systems  

 

2.1.  Intention 

 

2.1.1.  Fire Detection and Alarm Systems requirements in this chapter are to accomplish the 

following. 

 

2.1.1.1.  To enable designers and owners to make appropriate selection of Fire detec-

tion systems to complement the overall Fire Strategy of the building to en-
hance the safety level.  

 
2.1.1.2.  Provide early warning to occupants about the fire emergencies to enable 

them to evacuate to safety. 
 

2.1.1.3.  Ensure approved and listed material and 

equipment are selected by the consult-
ants and contractors to maintain the 
quality of Fire Detection and Alarm Sys-
tems. 

 
2.1.1.4.  Ensure owners and facility management 

maintain the Fire Detection and Alarm 
Systems to continue fulfilling the design 
intent. 
 

2.2.  Fire Detection Concept  

 

Did You Know? 

UAE has witnessed many 

fires casualties where occu-

pants were asleep and no 

smoke detectors were in-

stalled in the buildings. 

Properly installed and main-

tained Fire Alarm Systems’ 

Early Warning can save lives. 

2.2.1.  The purpose of fire alarm and signaling systems 

shall be primarily to provide notification of alarm, supervisory, and trouble conditions, 
to alert the occupants, to evacuate, to summon aid and to control emergency control 
functions. 

 
2.2.2.  The Fire produces variety of reactions and characteristic signatures such as Smoke, 

Heat, Radiant Energy. However, different fires based on the fuel it is consuming, have 
different characteristic signatures such as some fires produce intense heat without 
smoke, some produce low heat with intense smoke and some burn without flame but 
produce smoldering smoke. The fire detectors are designed to identify and sense these 
various inputs and process the data to evaluate, compare and differentiate the envi-
ronmental conditions or preset conditions to generate the output through control sys-
tems called “Fire Alarm”. 

 
2.2.3.  The Fire Detection and Alarm System essentially consists of Fire Detectors, communi-

cating with Central Control Unit called Fire Alarm Control Panel through wiring or wire-
less signals to generate Alarm through sounders, bells and audio visual alarm devices. 
The entire components are powered by primary power supply and secondary power 
supply through Batteries. 

 
2.2.4.  Requirements of this chapter are minimum guidelines. It is consultant’s responsibility 
to further refer to NFPA 70, NFPA 72, NFPA 75, NFPA 76, NFPA 110, NFPA 111 and   
Manufacturer’s design specifications and guidelines for more details. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 453 of 13483.  Types of Fire Detection Systems 

 

3.1. 

 

The various types of Fire Detectors that can be incorporated into Fire Detection and 
Alarm systems are as follows. 

3.1.1.  Smoke Detectors 

a.  Ionization Smoke Detectors (Banned in many jurisdictions now, including 

UAE) 

b.  Photoelectric Smoke Detectors 
c.  Optical Smoke Detectors 
d.  Aspiration Type Air Sampling smoke Detectors 
e.  Beam Type Smoke Detectors 
f.   Video Type smoke Detectors 

 

3.1.2.  Heat Detectors 

a.  Spot Type Heat Detectors 
b.  Line Type Heat Detectors 
c.  Fusible Link Heat Detectors 
 

3.1.3.  Radiant Energy Detectors 

a.  Ultraviolet Flame Detectors 
b.  Infrared Flame Detectors 
c.  Video Type Flame Detection 
d.  Spark and Ember Flame Detection 

 

3.1.4.  Multi-sensing Detectors 

a.  Heat-Smoke Multisensing Detectors 
b.  Combination of Gases Detectors 
 

3.1.5.  Manual Detectors 

a.  Manual Break Glass Call Point 
b.  Manual push button Call Point 
c.  Manual Pull Station 

 
3.1.6.  Supervisory Detectors 

a.  Water Flow Switch Detectors (Sprinkler System, Deluge System etc.) 
b.  Pressure Switch Detectors (Pre-action Systems,  
c.   Supervisory Signal Detectors (Pump, Water low level , automatic Door Close/

Open, elevator status etc.) 

 

3.1.7.  Gas Detectors 

a.  Carbon Monoxide (CO) Detectors 
b.  LP Gas Detectors 
c.  Flammable Gas and Vapor Detectors 
 

The various types of Control Mechanisms to monitor the Detectors and Sensors are as 
follows. 

3.2. 

 

a.  Addressable Fire Control Systems 
b.  Conventional Fire Control Systems 
c.  Wired Fire Control Systems 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 454 of 1348 

4.   Details of Fire Detection and Alarm Systems  

 

4.1.  General Requirements 

 
4.1.1.  The General requirements of Fire Detection and Alarm System shall be as per            

Table 8.1. 

 

Table 8.1: General Requirements of Fire Detection and Alarm Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. EQUIPMENT 

AND              

MATERIALS 

i.  Only listed and approved addressable Fire Detection and Alarm System shall be 
provided in all new constructions. Conventional type Fire detection Systems are 
not acceptable, unless it is existing. 

ii.  All Fire Detection and Alarm System equipment, Material , Accessories, Wiring 

shall be Civil Defence approved and listed as per Section 7. 

iii. System components shall be installed, tested, inspected, and maintained in ac-

cordance with the manufacturer’s published instructions and this Code. 

iv. Along with recommendations of this chapter, approved Manufacturer’s specifica-

tions should also be followed regarding spacing and installation details.  

v.  All devices and appliances that receive their power from the initiating device cir-

cuit or signaling line circuit of a control unit shall be listed for use with the control 
unit. 

vi. Equipment shall be designed so that it is capable of performing its intended func-
tions under the following conditions:                                                                              
a. At 85 percent and at 110 percent of the nameplate primary (main) and second-
ary (standby) input voltage(s).                                                                                           
b. At ambient temperatures of 0°C (32°F) and 49°C (120°F)                                          
c. At a relative humidity of 85 percent and an ambient temperature of 30°C (86°F) 

i.  Fire Detection shall be based on thorough evaluation of the area to be protected 
with following minimum considerations.                                                                        
a. Structural features, size, and shape of the rooms and bays.                                   
b. Occupancy and uses of areas  Ceiling heights                                                            
c.  Ceiling shape, surface, and obstructions.                                                                   
d. Ventilation                                                                                                                        
e.  Ambient environment                                                                                                    
f. Gas characteristics of the gases present                                                                      
g. Configuration of the contents in the area to be protected                                      
h. Response time(s) 

i.  All kinds of Detectors shall be approved and listed by Civil Defence. 
ii.  Initiating devices of the manual or automatic type shall be selected and installed 

to minimize unwanted alarms.  

iii. Where subject to mechanical damage, an initiating device shall be protected. A 
mechanical guard used to protect a smoke, heat, or radiant energy–sensing de-
tector shall be listed for use with the detector. 

iv. Initiating devices shall be supported independently of their attachment to the 

circuit conductors. 

v.  Unless tested and listed for recessed mounting, detectors shall not be recessed 

into the mounting surface. 

vi. Initiating devices shall be installed in a manner that provides accessibility for peri-

odic inspection, testing, and maintenance. 

2. DESIGN BASIS 

3. DETECTORS 

(INITIATING  

DEVICES) 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 455 of 1348 

Table 8.1: General Requirements of Fire Detection and Alarm Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

4. MANUAL 

i.  The manual call points shall be used only for fire alarm initiation. In addition, all 

CALL 

POINTS 

5. COVERAGE 

manual call points within an occupancy shall be of similar design.  

ii.  Time from the operation of call point to the actuation of alarm signal shall not ex-

ceed (10) seconds.  

iii. Where call points are installed in combustible, explosive environments these devic-

es shall be listed for the application. 

iv. Where manual call points are installed in food preparation environment, where 

breakable parts resulting from operation may cause risks, the designer shall consult 
with and conform to related approved standards. 

v.  The manual call points shall be installed on all escape routes and in particular be-

side stairwell entrances and all exits to open air. 

vi. The manual call points shall be installed so that they are conspicuous, unobstructed 

and accessible. 

vii. Distribution of the manual call points should be such that travel distance should not 

be more than 61 m to reach the nearest manual call point.  

viii.These figures to be reduced to 25m and 16m in limited mobility areas, and where 

processes of the area result in a likelihood of rapid fire development. 

ix. Manual Call Point shall be installed within 1.5 m from exit door opening. 
x.  The manual call points shall be installed generally at the height of 1.2 m, above 

floor level and in plain, accessible, well lit and free-hindrances places.  

i.  Every building shall be provided with Addressable Fire Detection and Alarm System 
as per Civil Defence Regulation. Every building, enclosed structure, enclosed occupi-
able spaces and building under construction shall be provided with Automatic Ad-
dressable Fire Detection and Alarm System. 

ii.  Detectors shall not be installed until after the cleanup of all construction works is 

completed and finalized. Any detectors installed during construction for the purpos-
es of protection during construction, shall be checked to confirm that their sensitivi-
ty is within the listed and marked sensitivity range and shall be repaired or replaced 
as necessary. 

iii. Detector coverage shall include all rooms, halls, storage areas, basements (unless 
protected by automatic sprinklers), attics, lofts and other enclosed usable spaces. 

iv. Detectors shall not be required to cover above false ceiling compartmented spaces 

on the rooms having less than 5m2 area. 

v.  Detectors shall not be required below open grids/cloud ceilings if opening of the 

grid are 6.4 mm or large and such openings constitute at least 70% of the ceiling or 
grid material. 

vi. Detectors shall not be required at non-combustible spaces such as below raised 

floor or accessible trench areas which do not consist service pipes, electrical wiring 
and communication cables. 

6. STAIRS 

i.  At least one smoke detector shall be installed at the top of the stair of a non-

highrise building. 

ii.  In Highrise and Super Highrise buildings, along with one smoke detector at the top 

of the stair, multiple smoke detectors at intermediate landings, every 23 m, shall be 
provided. 

iii. Stairs shall be provided with Voice speakers with clear speech audibility. 
iv. Sounders shall not be required in stairs. 

7. ELEVATOR 

i.  At least one smoke detector shall be installed at the top of the elevator shaft of a   

SHAFT 

non-highrise building to initiate elevator recall. 

ii.  In Highrise and Super Highrise buildings, along with one smoke detector at the top 
of the shaft, multiple smoke detectors at intermediate levels, every 23 m, shall be 
provided to initiate elevator recall. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 456 of 1348 

 

Table 8.1: General Requirements of Fire Detection and Alarm Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

8. PARTITIONS 

i.  Where partitions within the spaces extend to within 15% of the ceiling height, the 

spaces separated by the partitions shall be considered as separate rooms. 

ii.  And such separate rooms shall be provided with individual detector coverage. 

9. HVAC  

i.  In spaces served by air-handling systems, detectors shall not be located lesser 

than 1m from supply or return diffusers, where airflow prevents operation of the 
detectors.   

ii.  Where concealed accessible spaces above suspended ceilings are used as a return 

air plenum,  detection shall be provided  at each connection from the return air 
plenum to the central air-handling system. 

iii. Detectors installed in such plenums shall be listed for such application. 
iv. In under-floor spaces and above-ceiling spaces that are used as HVAC plenums, 
detectors shall be listed for the anticipated environment as required by ambient 
conditions like temperature, humidity and airflow. 

v.  Detector  used in plenums shall have spacing and locations selected on the basis 

of anticipated airflow patterns and fire type. 

vi. Detectors placed in environmental air ducts or plenums shall not be used as a 

substitute for open area detectors.  

10. EXPLOSIVE    

i.  Where Fire Detection and Alarm System is installed in explosive, Hazardous at-

ATMOS-

PHERE 

mosphere with flammable vapours in its atmosphere, all devices, enclosures, wir-
ing, junction boxes, connectors and circuitry shall be listed and approved 
“Explosion Proof” and “Intrinsically Safe” equipment. 

11. DETECTION 

i.  Buildings shall be divided into a number of detection zones for easy recognition 

ZONES 

(TYPICALLY FOR  

EXISTING      

CONVENTIONAL 

SYSTEMS) 

and short search time.  Fire alarm systems shall be designed to suite the fire plan 
procedures followed by occupants during emergency.  Single open, short circuit 
or ground in one detection zone shall not affect the operation of other zones. 

ii.  The area of any single open detection zone to which the building has been divid-

ed shall not exceed 2000 m²; except for a single, open plan area, which should 
not exceed 10 000 m².  

iii. If any floor area is greater than 2000m², it shall be divided into separate detec-
tion zones of 2000m² or less, this subdivision may or may not be achieved by a 
physical barrier.  

iv. Search distance shall not exceed 60 m for conventional system; Search distance 

for addressable system is 100 m if building is protected by sprinklers. 

v.  A zone shall not include multiple floors. 
vi. Automatic fire detectors within any enclosed stairwell or lift shaft or other en-

closed flu-like structure should be considered as a separate detection zone.  

vii. Indication of detection zone status on the control panel is by LED and/or graph-

ical text indicator.  

viii.Voids below raised floor and voids above false ceiling shall be configured as sepa-

rate zones from the room space.  

ix. Any remote indicator should be clearly labelled to indicate detectors located in 

voids. They should be sited and/or labelled in such a way as to assist in determin-
ing the location of the detectors that they serve.  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 457 of 1348 

 

Table 8.1: General Requirements of Fire Detection and Alarm Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

12. ALARM 

ZONES 

i.  Alarm zones shall be clearly defined in complex buildings where phased evacua-

tion is required or in buildings where a stage alarm is to be provided. 

ii.  Alarm zone may include of several detection zones and not visa- versa. 
iii. Alarm zone boundaries shall match those of fire compartments and/or detection 

zones.  

iv.  The extent of any overlap of signals between alarm zones shall not be sufficient 

to result in confusion of occupants in any area of the building.  

v.  At no time shall conflicting alarm warning or alarm signals be broadcast within 

one alarm zone. 

13. WIRING 

i.  All Fire Detection and Alarm wiring shall be 2 hour fire rated and Civil Defence 

14. FIRE ALARM 

CONTROL 

PANEL (FACP) 

listed. 

ii.  Metal conduits are not necessary where wiring is 2 hour fire rated and listed by 

Civil Defence. 

iii. Metal conduits are required where fire alarm wiring is in corrosive environment., 

irrespective of wiring fire rating. 

iv. Fire alarm system wiring and equipment, including all circuits controlled and 

powered by the fire alarm system, shall be installed in accordance with the re-
quirements of this Code and of NFPA 70 Article 760.  

v.  All fire detection alarm wiring shall be Class A type where circuit redundancy is 
ensured  and operational capability continues even when single open condition, 
single ground fault and single fault in the circuitry exists. And such faults are an-
nunciated in the control panel. 

vi. Loop isolators shall be installed to monitor and maintain wiring integrity and safe-

guard from short circuits. Loop isolators shall be installed as per manufacturer’s 
guidelines. 

1. GENERAL 
 
i.  Fire Alarm Control Panel shall be approved and listed by Civil Defence. 
ii.  Fire Alarm Main Control Panel installed in all Highrise building shall have high per-
formance and stability, tested for redundancy (CPU, I/O cards, Display etc. should 
have redundancy features to ensure continuous operation in case of failure of  
any of these components and shall have hot-swap features to repair and replace 
these components without  turning off the main power supply and without com-
promising continuation of the fire alarm control panel performance. 

iii. FACP architecture shall be such that circuit modules can easily be added to up-
grade the capacity of the Control panel to monitor the additional detectors or 
additional loops of detectors and desired output functions. 

iv. FACP shall be multi-functional, having feature to monitor and supervise Fire De-

tection, Gas Detection and Fire Suppression activation simultaneously. 

v.  Generally FACP should have spare capacity to add 20% more detectors with addi-

tional wiring and interface modules without adding additional circuit boards 
(modules) to upgrade, to enable alterations and up gradation to the facility. 

vi. FACP shall be installed in a location which is attended by facility management or 
designated personnel at all times, such as reception areas, security guard houses, 
Emergency command centres, Facility monitoring rooms, nurse stations at hospi-
tals etc. 

vii. FACP shall be located in a visible and accessible location. 
viii.FACP shall not be installed in an unattended room, service rooms,  mechanical 

rooms. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 458 of 1348 

 

Table 8.1: General Requirements of Fire Detection and Alarm Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

14. FIRE ALARM 

CONTROL 

PANEL (FACP) 

2. POSITIVE ALARM SEQUENCE (DELAYED ALARM SEQUENCE) 
 
i. 

The signal from an automatic fire detection device selected for positive alarm 
sequence operation shall be acknowledged at the fire alarm control unit by 
trained personnel within 15 seconds of annunciation in order to initiate the 
alarm investigation phase.  
If the signal is not acknowledged within 15 seconds, notification signals in ac-
cordance with the building evacuation or relocation plan and remote signals 
shall be automatically and immediately activated. 

ii. 

iv. 

iii.  Trained personnel shall have up to 180 seconds during the alarm investigation 
phase to evaluate the fire condition and reset the system. If the system is not 
reset during the investigation phase, notification signals in accordance with the 
building evacuation plan and remote signals shall be automatically and immedi-
ately activated. 
If a second automatic fire detector selected for positive alarm sequence is actu-
ated during the alarm investigation phase, notification signals in accordance 
with the building evacuation or relocation plan and remote signals shall be au-
tomatically and immediately activated. 
If any other initiating device is actuated, notification signals in accordance with 
the building evacuation or relocation plan and remote signals shall be automati-
cally and immediately activated. 

v. 

vi.  The system shall provide means for bypassing the positive alarm sequence. 
 
3. ACTUATION TIME 
 
i. 

Actuation of alarm notification devices or emergency voice communications, 
fire safety functions, and annunciation at the protected premises shall occur 
within 10 seconds after the activation of an initiating device.  

ii.  An open or ground condition of any fire alarm circuits shall result in the annun-

ciation of a trouble signal at the protected premise within 200 seconds. 

iii.  System bandwidth is monitored to confirm that all communications between 

equipment that is critical to the operation of the fire alarm system or fire safety 
functions take place within 10 seconds; failure shall be indicated within 200 se-
conds. 

iv.  Failure of any equipment that is critical to the operation of the fire alarm sys-
tem or fire safety functions is indicated at the master fire alarm control unit 
within 200 seconds. 

v.  A listed barrier gateway, integral with or attached to each control unit or group 
of control units, as appropriate, shall be provided to prevent the other systems 
from interfering with or controlling the fire alarm system. 

vi.  Each interconnected fire alarm control unit shall be separately monitored for 

vii. 

alarm, supervisory, and trouble conditions.  
Interconnected fire alarm control unit alarm signals shall be permitted to be 
monitored by zone or by combined common signals. 

viii.  Protected premises fire alarm control units shall be capable of being reset or 
silenced only from the fire alarm control unit at the protected premises or a 
computer-based front end unit listed for use by the manufacturer of the fire 
alarm control unit. 

ix.  All non–fire alarm components shall be listed for fire alarm use or for fire condi-

 

tions. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 459 of 1348 

 

Table 8.1: General Requirements of Fire Detection and Alarm Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

14. FIRE ALARM 

CONTROL 

PANEL 

(FACP) 

4. DETECTION DEVICES-ALARM SIGNAL INITIATION 
 
i. 

A smoke detector that is continuously subjected to a smoke concentration 
above alarm threshold does not delay the system functions by more than 1 mi-
nute.  

 
5. SPRINKLER SYSTEM (WATER FLOW SWITCH) -ALARM INITIATION 
 
i.  Waterflow alarm-initiating devices from sprinkler system shall be connected to 
a dedicated function fire alarm control unit designated as “sprinkler waterflow 
and supervisory system,” and permanently identified on the control unit and 
record drawings. 

ii.  Where waterflow alarm-initiating devices are connected to a building fire alarm 

system, a dedicated function fire alarm control unit shall not be required. 

iii.  The number of waterflow alarm–initiating devices permitted to be connected to 

a single alarm initiating device circuit shall not exceed five. 

iv.  Activation of the initiating device (Water Flow Switch) shall occur within           

90 seconds of waterflow at the alarm-initiating device when flow occurs that is 
equal to or greater than that from a single sprinkler of the smallest orifice size 
installed in the system. 

v.  Movement of water due to waste, surges, or variable pressure shall not initiate 

an alarm signal. 

 
6. SPRINKLER SYSTEM (WATER FLOW SWITCH) -SUPERVISORY SIGNAL  INITIATION 
 
i. 

Supervisory signal-initiating devices shall be connected to a dedicated function 
fire alarm control unit designated as “sprinkler waterflow and supervisory sys-
tem,” and permanently identified on the control unit and record drawings. 
ii.  Where supervisory signal-initiating devices are connected to a building fire 

alarm system, a dedicated function fire alarm control unit shall not be required. 

iii.  The number of supervisory signal-initiating devices permitted to be connected 

to a single initiating device circuit shall not exceed 20. 

A pump running signal shall be permitted to be a supervisory or alarm signal. 

 
7. FIRE PUMP -ALARM INITIATION 
 
i. 
 
8. OTHER FIRE SUPPRESSION SYSTEMS -ALARM INITIATION 
 
i. 

The actuation of a fire suppression system shall annunciate an alarm or supervi-
sory condition at the building fire alarm control unit. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 460 of 1348 

 

Table 8.1: General Requirements of Fire Detection and Alarm Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

14. FIRE 

ALARM 

CONTROL 

PANEL 

(FACP) 

9. OTHER FIRE SUPPRESSION SYSTEMS –SUPERVISORY SIGNAL INITIATION 
 
i. 

An off-normal condition of a fire suppression system shall annunciate a superviso-
ry condition at the building fire alarm control unit. 
Supervisory signals that latch in the off-normal state and require manual reset of 
the system to restore them to normal shall be permitted. 

ii. 

 
10. SUPPRESSION SYSTEM ACTUATION-RELEASING SERVICE CONTROL UNITS 
 
i. 

Releasing service control units shall be connected to the protected premises fire 
alarm system. 
Fire alarm and supervisory signals generated at the releasing control unit shall be 
annunciated at a protected premises fire alarm unit. 

ii. 

iii.  Actuation of any suppression system connected to a releasing service control unit 
shall be annunciated at the protected premises fire alarm control unit even where 
the system actuation is by manual means or otherwise accomplished without ac-
tuation of the releasing service control unit. 
If a valve is installed in the connection between a suppression system and an initi-
ating device, the valve shall be supervised. 

iv. 

 
11. TROUBLE SIGNAL INITIATION 
 
i. 

Automatic fire suppression system alarm-initiating devices and supervisory signal-
initiating devices and their circuits shall be designed and installed so that they can-
not be subject to tampering, opening, or removal without initiating a Trouble sig-
nal. This provision shall include junction boxes installed outside of buildings to fa-
cilitate access to the initiating device circuit. 

 
12. NOTIFICATION/FIRE ALARM SIGNAL 
 
i. 

Fire alarm and mass notification systems provided for evacuation or relocation of 
occupants shall have one or more notification on each floor of the building. 

15. POWER      

i. 

SUPPLIES 

ii. 

At least two power supply sources shall be provided for any Fire Detection and 
Alarm System, one primary and one secondary, fully supervised by FACP for fail-
ure, loss of power, trouble, short circuit conditions. 
Each power supply shall be of adequate capacity for the full functionality of the 
System. 

iii.  Primary Supply shall be directly from the Electric Utility Supply. 
iv.  The supply from Electric Utility branch shall be direct to Fire Alarm System only 

v. 

and shall not serve any other loads.  
The system circuit disconnecting means shall be permanently identified as to its 
purpose, shall be secured and shall be accessible only to authorized personnel. 

vi.  Such disconnecting switch shall be clearly marked “FIRE ALARM/DO NOT DISCON-

NECT” 

vii.  All wiring from Electric Utility branch to Fire Alarm Control Panel shall be 2 hour 

fire rated and protected from mechanical damages. 

viii.  An overcurrent protective device shall be provided in accordance with NFPA 70. 
ix.  The secondary means of Power Supply shall be permitted to be either approved 

UPS in accordance with NFPA 111 or Batteries dedicated to the FACP. 

x.  Operation on secondary power shall not affect the required performance of a sys-

tem or supervising station facility, including alarm, supervisory, and trouble signals 
and indications. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 461 of 1348 

 

Table 8.1: General Requirements of Fire Detection and Alarm Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

15. POWER      

SUPPLIES 

xi.     The secondary power supply capacity for supervising station facilities and equip-
ment shall be capable of supporting operations for a minimum of 24 hours and 
then shall be capable of operating the system during a fire or other emergency 
condition for a period of 30 minutes at maximum connected load. 

xii.    Battery calculations shall include a minimum 20 percent safety margin above the 

calculated amp-hour capacity required. 

xiii.   Batteries shall be marked with the month and year of manufacture using the 

month/year format. 

xiv.   Storage batteries shall comply with the requirements of Article 480 of NFPA 70. 
xv.    Battery charging equipment shall be provided to recharge batteries within 48 

hours after fully charged batteries have been subject to a single discharge cycle. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 462 of 1348 

i. 

 

Table 8.1: General Requirements of Fire Detection and Alarm Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

16. NOTIFICATION 

i. 

The notification appliances are used to initiate or direct evacuation or relo-
cation of the occupants, or for providing information to occupants or staff, 
as the building fire strategy. 

ii.  All notification devices shall be approved and listed by Civil Defence. 
iii.  Notification devices shall have nameplate indicating the electrical connec-
tion parameters, audible decibels or visible performance and installation 
methods. 

iv.  Notification devices shall be installed such that they are not mechanically 

damaged and shall be protected against mechanical damage where subject-
ed to. 

v.  Notification devices shall be mounted such that they are supported inde-

vi. 

pendently of their attachments to circuit conductors. 
 An average ambient sound level greater than 105 dBA shall require the use 
of a visible notification devices. 

vii.  The total sound pressure level produced by combining the ambient sound 

pressure level with all audible notification appliances operating shall not ex-
ceed 110 dBA at the minimum hearing distance. 

viii.  Where audible appliances are installed to provide signals for sleeping areas, 

ix. 

x. 

i. 
ii. 

they shall have a sound level of 75 dBA 
If ceiling heights allow, wall-mounted notification devices shall have their 
tops above the finished floors at heights of not less than 2.29 m and below 
the finished ceilings at distances of not less than 150 mm. 
Audible notification appliances for wide area signaling shall be installed in 
accordance with the approved design documents, and the manufacturer’s 
installation instruction to achieve the required performance. 

Visible notification devices shall be approved and listed by Civil Defence. 
The flash rate shall not exceed two flashes per second (2 Hz) nor be less than 
one flash every second (1 Hz) throughout the listed voltage range of the ap-
pliance. 

iii.  A maximum pulse duration shall be 0.2 second with a maximum duty cycle 

of 40%. 

iv.  The pulse duration shall be defined as the time interval between initial and 

v. 

vi. 

final points of 10% of maximum signal. 
Lights used for fire alarm signalling only or to signal the intent for complete 
evacuation shall be clear or nominal white and shall not exceed 1000 cd 
(effective intensity). 
Lights used to signal occupants to seek information or instructions shall be 
clear, nominal white or other colour as required by the emergency plan. 

vii.  Visible notification devices shall be located not more than 4.57 m from the 
end of the corridor with a separation not greater than 30.5 m between Visi-
ble notification devices. 

viii.  Wall-mounted devices shall be mounted such that the entire lens is not less 

than 2 m and not greater than 2.44 m above the finished floor. 

ix.  Where low ceiling heights do not permit wall mounting at a minimum of 2 
m, wall mounted visible appliances shall be mounted within 150 mm of the 
ceiling. 

x.  Visual alarm signals (flashers) shall be used in areas where audio alarm signal 

is not effective, not feasible to type of occupancy (i.e. Noisy parking spaces, 
extremely noisy environment like engine room and plant rooms) or in areas 
where audio alarm requires the aid of visual alarm. 

DEVICES (BELLS, 

SOUNDERS) 

17. VISUAL          

NOTIFICATION 

DEVICES 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 463 of 1348 

 

Table 8.1: General Requirements of Fire Detection and Alarm Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

17. VISUAL          

i. 

NOTIFICATION 

DEVICES    

SPACING IN 

ROOMS 

ii. 

The spacing of Visual Notification devices in room shall be as per Manufac-
turer’s specifications. However, number of devices shall be as per                    
Table 8.1.a.  
Room spacing in accordance with Table 8.1.a. and Figure 8.1. for wall-
mounted appliances shall be based on locating the visible notification device 
at the halfway distance of the wall. 

Table 8.1.a.: Spacing of Visual Notification Devices in Rooms 

MAXIMUM ROOM SIZE  MAXIMUM CEILING HEIGHT 

MINIMUM REQUIRED LIGHT     
OUTPUT (ONE LIGHT, cd) 

1. 6.1 m x 6.1 m 

2. 9.1 m x 9.1 m 

3. 12.2 m x 12.2 m 

4. 13.4 m x 13.4 m 

5. 15.2 m x 15.2 m 

6. 16.2 m x 16.2 m 

7. 16.8 m x 16.8 m 

8. 18 m x 18 m 

9. 19.2 m x 19.2 m 

10. 20.7 m x 20.7 m 

11. 21.3 m x 21.3 m 

12. 6.1 m x 6.1 m 

13. 9.1 m x 9.1 m 

14. 13.4 m x 13.4 m 

15. 14 m x 14 m 

16. 15.2 m x 15.2 m 

17. 16.2 m x 16.2 m 

18. 16.8 m x 16.8 m 

19. 18 m x 18 m 

20. 19.2 m x 6.1 m 

21. 20.7 m x 20.7 m 

22. 21.3 m x 21.3 m 

23. 6.1 m x 6.1 m 

24. 9.1 m x 9.1 m 

25. 15.2 m x 15.2 m 

26. 16.2 m x 16.2 m 

27. 16.8 m x 16.8 m 

28. 18 m x 18 m 

29. 19.2 m x 19.2 m 

30. 20.7 m x 20.7 m 

31. 21.3 m x 21.3 m 
 

3 m 

3 m 

3 m 

3 m 

3 m 

3 m 

3 m 

3 m 

3 m 

3 m 

3 m 

6.1 m 

6.1 m 

6.1 m 

6.1 m 

6.1 m 

6.1 m 

6.1 m 

6.1 m 

6.1 m 

6.1 m 

6.1 m 

9.1 m 

9.1 m 

9.1 m 

9.1 m 

9.1 m 

9.1 m 

9.1 m 

9.1 m 

9.1 m 

15 

30 

60 

75 

95 

110 

115 

135 

150 

177 

185 

30 

45 

75 

80 

95 

110 

115 

135 

150 

177 

185 

55 

75 

95 

110 

115 

135 

150 

177 

185 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 464 of 1348 

 

 

Figure 8.1.: Visual Notification Devices arrangements in spaces 

Figure 8.2.: Decibel Requirement for Sleeping Areas 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 465 of 1348 

 

Table 8.1: General Requirements of Fire Detection and Alarm Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

18. NOTIFICATION 

i. 

ZONES 

Fire alarm and mass notification systems provided for evacuation or reloca-
tion of occupants shall have one or more notification zones on each floor of 
the building.  

ii.  Notification zones shall be consistent with the emergency response or 

evacuation plan for the protected premises. 

iii.  The boundaries of notification zones shall be coincident with building outer 

iv. 

walls, building fire or smoke compartment boundaries, floor separations, 
or other fire safety subdivisions. 
In protected premises with more than one notification zone, a single open, 
short-circuit, or ground on the system installation conductors shall not 
affect operation of more than one notification zone. 

19. NOTIFICATION 

i. 

COMBINED WITH 

PUBLIC ADDRESS     

SYSTEM            

(PA SYSTEM) 

ii. 

Speakers used as alarm notification appliances on fire alarm systems shall 
also be permitted to be used for non-emergency purposes, provided that 
one of the following condition is met:                                                                                             
a. The emergency command centre is constantly attended by trained per-
sonnel.                                                                                                                                      
b. The speakers and associated audio equipment are installed or located 
with safeguards to resist tampering or mal adjustments of those compo-
nents essential for intended emergency notification.  
Speakers used as alarm notification appliances on fire alarm systems shall 
also be permitted to be used for mass notification systems.  

iii.  Fire alarm signals from combination system shall be distinctive, clearly rec-

ognizable and with the exception of mass notification inputs, take prece-
dence over any other signal even when a non–fire alarm signal is initiated 
first and shall be indicated as follows in descending order of priority unless 
otherwise permitted by this Code:                                                                                                   
a. Signals associated with life safety                                                                             
b. Signals associated with property protection                                                           
c. Trouble signals associated with life and/or property protection                        
d.  All other signals.  
Live voice instructions originating from the protected premises fire or mass 
notification systems shall override all previously initiated signals and shall 
have priority over both of the following:                                                                              
a. Any subsequent automatically initiated signals on that channel                                 
b. Remotely generated mass notification messages.  

iv. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 466 of 1348 

Table 8.1: General Requirements of Fire Detection and Alarm Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

i.  Fire alarm control units used for automatic or manual activation of a fire sup-
pression system shall be listed for releasing service and approved by Civil De-
fence.  

ii.  Releasing devices for suppression systems shall be listed for use with releasing 

service control units. 

iii.  Fire alarm systems used for fire suppression–releasing service shall be provid-

ed with a disconnect switch to allow the system to be tested without actuating 
the fire suppression systems. 

iv.  Operation of a disconnect switch or a disable function shall cause a superviso-

ry signal at the fire alarm control unit. 

v.  The disconnect shall be a physical switch and not be accomplished by using 

software. 

vi.  Suppression systems or groups of systems shall be controlled by a single con-
trol unit that monitors the associated initiating device(s), actuates the associ-
ated releasing device(s), and controls the associated agent release notification 
appliances.  

vii.  If the releasing control unit is located in a protected premises having a sepa-
rate fire alarm system, it shall be monitored for alarm, supervisory, and trou-
ble signals, but shall not be dependent on or affected by the operation or fail-
ure of the protected premises fire alarm system. 

viii.  Fire alarm systems performing suppression system releasing functions shall be 

installed in such a manner that they are effectively protected from damage 
caused by activation of the suppression system(s) they control. 

20. SUPPRESSION 

SYSTEM       

ACTUATION 

THROUGH 

FACP 

21. ELEVATOR   

RECALL FOR 

i.  System-type smoke detectors, or other automatic fire detection located in ele-
vator lobbies, elevator hoist ways, and elevator machine rooms including ma-
chine space, control room, and control space used to initiate fire fighters’ ser-
vice recall, shall be connected to the building fire alarm system. 

FIRE FIGHTERS’    

SERVICES 

ii.  Each elevator lobby, elevator hoist way, and elevator machine room smoke 

detector, or other automatic fire detection, shall be capable of initiating eleva-
tor recall when all other devices on the same initiating device circuit have been 
manually or automatically placed in the alarm condition. 

iii.  A lobby smoke detector shall be located on the ceiling within 6.4 m of the cen-
terline of each elevator door within the elevator bank under control of the de-
tector. 

iv.  Smoke detectors shall not be installed in unsprinklered elevator hoistways un-

less they are installed to activate the elevator hoistway smoke relief equip-
ment. 
If ambient conditions prohibit installation of automatic smoke detection, other 
automatic fire detection shall be permitted. 

v. 

vi.  When actuated, any detector that has initiated firefighters’ recall shall also be 

annunciated at the building fire alarm control unit and required remote an-
nunciators.  

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 467 of 1348 

 

Table 8.1: General Requirements of Fire Detection and Alarm Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

22. VISUAL    

i. 

WARNING FOR 

ELEVATORS 

Actuation from elevator hoist way and elevator machine room smoke detec-
tors or other automatic fire detection shall cause separate and distinct visible 
annunciation at the building fire alarm control unit or the fire alarm control 
unit and required annunciators to alert fire fighters and other emergency 
personnel that the elevators are no longer safe to use. 

23. ELEVATOR 

SHUTDOWN 

ii.  Where lobby detectors are used for other than initiating elevator recall, the 

signal initiated by the detector shall also initiate an alarm signal. 

iii.  For each elevator or group of elevators, an output(s) shall be provided for the 
elevator visual warning signal in response to the following:                                   
a. Activation of the elevator machine room initiating devices                                
b. Activation of the elevator hoist way initiating devices  

i. 

Elevator system shall have over riding switch for Fire Fighter’s control to over 
ride all the elevator shutdown functions. 

ii.  Where elevators are used for evacuation in the building fire strategy, the ele-

vators and fire fighter’s control mechanisms shall include all the features as 
per Chapter 3, Section 3.9. 

iii.  Where heat detectors are used to shut down elevator power prior to sprin-

iv. 

v. 

kler operation, the detector shall have both a lower temperature rating and a 
higher sensitivity as compared to the sprinkler. 
If heat detectors are used to shut down elevator power prior to sprinkler op-
eration, they shall be placed within 610 mm of each sprinkler head. 
If pressure or water flow switches are used to shut down elevator power im-
mediately upon or prior to the discharge of water from sprinklers, the use of 
devices with time-delay switches or time-delay capability shall not be per-
mitted. 

vi.  Control circuits to shut down elevator power shall be monitored for presence 

of operating voltage. Loss of voltage to the control circuit for the discon-
necting means shall cause a supervisory signal to be indicated at the control 
unit and required remote annunciators.  

vii.  The initiating devices shall be monitored for integrity by the fire alarm con-

trol unit  

24. HVAC         

i. 

SHUTDOWN 

ii. 

iii. 

If connected to the fire alarm system serving the protected premises, all de-
tection devices used to cause the operation of HVAC systems’ smoke damp-
ers, fire dampers, fan control, smoke doors, and fire doors shall be monitored 
for integrity. 
Smoke detectors mounted in the air ducts of HVAC systems shall initiate ei-
ther an alarm signal at the protected premises or a supervisory signal at a 
constantly attended location or supervising station. 
If the fire alarm control unit actuates the HVAC system for the purpose of 
smoke control, the automatic alarm-initiating zones shall be coordinated with 
the smoke-control zones they actuate. 

iv.  Where interconnected as a combination system, a Firefighter’s Smoke Con-
trol Panel (SCP) as per Chapter 10, Table 10.1.11., shall be provided to per-
form manual control over the automatic operation of the system’s smoke 
control strategy. 

v.  Where interconnected as a combination system, the smoke control system 

programming shall be designed such that normal HVAC operation or changes 
do not prevent the intended performance of the smoke control strategy. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 468 of 1348 

 

Table 8.1: General Requirements of Fire Detection and Alarm Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

25. DOOR RELEASE 

SERVICE 

1.  GENERAL 
 
i. 

All detection devices used for door hold-open release service shall be moni-
tored for integrity. 

ii.  All door hold-open release and integral door release and closure devices used 

for release service shall be monitored for integrity.  

iii.  Magnetic door holders that allow doors to close upon loss of operating power 

shall not be required to have a secondary power source. 

iv.  Any device or system intended to actuate the locking or unlocking of exits 

shall be connected to the fire alarm system serving the protected premises. 

v.  All exits shall unlock upon receipt of any fire alarm signal by means of the fire 

vi. 

alarm system serving the protected premises. 
If exit doors are unlocked by the fire alarm system, the unlocking function 
shall occur prior to or concurrent with activation of any public-mode notifica-
tion appliances in the area(s) served by the normally locked exits.  

vii.  All doors that are required to be unlocked by the fire alarm system shall re-

main unlocked until the fire alarm condition is manually reset. 

 
2.  SMOKE DETECTORS FOR DOOR RELEASE SERVICE 
 
i. 

Smoke detectors that are part of an open area protection system covering the 
room, corridor, or enclosed space on each side of the smoke door and that 
are located and spaced as required by spot-type detectors requirement shall 
be permitted to accomplish smoke door release service. 
Smoke detectors shall be of the photoelectric or other approved type. 
If the depth of wall section above the door is 610 mm or less, one ceiling-
mounted smoke detector shall be required on one side of the doorway only, 
or two wall-mounted detectors shall be required, one on each side of the 
doorway. In Figure 8.3. Part A OR B shall apply. 
If the depth of wall section above the door is greater than 610 mm on one 
side only, one ceiling-mounted smoke detector shall be required on the high-
er side of the doorway only, or one wall-mounted detector shall be required 
on both sides of the doorway. In Figure 8.3., part D, shall apply. 
If the depth of wall section above the door is greater than 610 mm on both 
sides, two ceiling-mounted or wall-mounted detectors shall be required, one 
on each side of the doorway. Figure 8.3., part F, shall apply. 
If a detector is specifically listed for door frame mounting or if a listed combi-
nation or integral detector–door closer assembly is used, only one detector 
shall be required if installed in the manner recommended by the manufactur-
er's published instructions. Figure 8.3., parts A, C, and E, shall apply. 
If the depth of wall section is more than 1524 mm, additional detectors might 
be required. 

ii. 
iii. 

iv. 

v. 

vi. 

vii. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 469 of 1348 

 

 

Figure 8.3.: Smoke Detector Location Requirements for Door Release Service 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 470 of 1348 

 

Table 8.1: General Requirements of Fire Detection and Alarm Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

25. DOOR RELEASE 

SERVICE 

3.  SMOKE DETECTORS FOR  VARIOUS DOOR ARRANGEMENT 
 
i. 

If the separation between doorways exceeds 610 mm, each doorway shall be 
treated separately. Figure 8.4., part E, shall apply. 
Each group of three or more doorway openings shall be treated separately.  
Figure 8.5. shall apply. 

ii. 

iii.  Each group of doorway openings that exceeds 6.1 m in width measured at its 

iv. 

v. 

overall extremes shall be treated separately. Figure 8.6. shall apply  
If there are multiple doorways and listed door frame-mounted detectors or if 
listed combination or integral detector–door closer assemblies are used, 
there shall be one detector for each single or double doorway. 
If ceiling-mounted smoke detectors are to be installed on a smooth ceiling for 
a single or double doorway, they shall be located as follows (Figure 8.4. shall 
apply):                                                                                                                               
a.On the centreline of the doorway                                                                             
b. No more than 1.5 m measured along the ceiling and perpendicular to the 
doorway (Figure 8.3. shall apply.)                                                                                  
c. No closer than shown in Figure 8.3., parts B, D, and F 

Figure 8.4.: Detector Location for Single and Double Doors 

Figure 8.5.: Detector Location for Group of Doorways 

Figure 8.6.: Detector Location for Group of Doorways over 6.1 m in width 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 471 of 1348 

Table 8.1: General Requirements of Fire Detection and Alarm Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

26. WATER LEVEL 

i. 

SUPERVISORY 

Two separate and distinct signals shall be initiated: one indicating that the re-
quired water level has been lowered or raised (off-normal) and the other indi-
cating restoration. 

ii.  A pressure tank signal-initiating device shall indicate both high- and low-water 

level conditions. The off-normal signal shall be initiated when the water level 
falls 76 mm or rises 76 mm. 

iii.  A supervisory signal-initiating device for other than pressure tanks shall initi-

ate a low-water level signal when the water level falls 300 mm. 

27. PRESSURE   

i. 

SUPERVISORY 

Two separate and distinct signals shall be initiated: one indicating that the re-
quired pressure has increased or decreased (off-normal) and the other indi-
cating restoration of the pressure to its normal value. 

ii.  A pressure tank supervisory signal-initiating device for a pressurized limited 

water supply, such as a pressure tank, shall indicate both high- and low-
pressure conditions.  

iii.  The off-normal signal shall be initiated when the required pressure increases 

or decreases by 70 kPa (10 psi). 

iv.  A pressure supervisory signal-initiating device for a dry-pipe sprinkler system 

v. 

i. 

ii. 

shall indicate both high- and low-pressure conditions. The off-normal signal 
shall be initiated when the pressure increases or decreases by 70 kPa (10 psi). 
 A steam pressure supervisory signal-initiating device shall indicate a low-
pressure condition. The off-normal signal shall be initiated prior to the pres-
sure falling below 110% of the minimum operating pressure of the steam-
operated equipment supplied. 

Two separate and distinct signals shall be initiated: one indicating movement 
of the valve from its normal position (off-normal) and the other indicating res-
toration of the valve to its normal position. 
The off-normal signal shall be initiated during the first two revolutions of the 
hand wheel or during one-fifth of the travel distance of the valve control appa-
ratus from its normal position. 

iii.  The off-normal signal shall not be restored at any valve position except nor-

mal. 

iv.  An initiating device for supervising the position of a control valve shall not in-
terfere with the operation of the valve, obstruct the view of its indicator, or 
prevent access for valve maintenance. 

28. CONTROL 

VALVE SUPER-

VISORY 

Points to Ponder 

Fire Detection and Alarm Systems are many a times despised and ignored be-

cause  of frequent experience of false alarms, which can be nuisance and waste 

of time when unwanted evacuations take place. 

Reasons for false alarms are 

 

 

Incorrect selection of type of detector for particular area 

Incorrect installation of the system 

  Poor maintenance or absence of maintenance 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 472 of 1348 

 

Table 8.1: General Requirements of Fire Detection and Alarm Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

29. SMOKE     

i. 

CONTROL    

SYSTEMS 

ii. 

Smoke detectors installed and used to prevent smoke spread by initiating con-
trol of fans, dampers, doors, and other equipment shall be classified in the fol-
lowing manner:                                                                                                                 
a. Area detectors that are installed in the related smoke compartments                  
b. Detectors that are installed in the air duct systems.                                               
c. Video image smoke detection that is installed in related smoke compart-
ments. 
To prevent the recirculation of dangerous quantities of smoke, a detector ap-
proved for air duct use shall be installed on the supply side of air-handling sys-
tems. 

30.  DETECTORS 

IN AIR DUCTS 

iii.  Area smoke detectors within smoke compartments shall be permitted to be 

used to control the spread of smoke by initiating operation of doors, dampers, 
and other equipment. 

Detectors shall be listed for installation in air ducts. 

i. 
ii.  Air duct detectors shall be installed in such a way as to obtain a representative 
sample of the airstream. This installation shall be permitted to be achieved by 
any of the following methods:                                                                                       
a. Rigid mounting within the duct                                                                                 
b. Rigid mounting to the wall of the duct with the sensing element protruding 
into the duct                                                                                                                      
c. Installation outside the duct with rigidly mounted sampling tubes protruding 
into the duct                                                                                                                     
d. Installation through the duct with projected light beam 

iii.  Detectors shall be mounted in accordance with the manufacturer’s published 
instructions and shall be accessible for cleaning by providing access doors or 
control units. 

iv.  The location of all detectors in air duct systems shall be permanently and clear-

ly identified and recorded.  

v.  Detectors mounted outside of a duct that employs sampling tubes for trans-
porting smoke from inside the duct to the detector shall be designed and in-
stalled to allow verification of airflow from the duct to the detector. 

vi.  Detectors shall be listed for operation over the complete range of air velocities, 
temperature, and humidity expected at the detector when the air-handling sys-
tem is operating. 

vii.  All penetrations of a return air duct in the vicinity of detectors installed on or in 

an air duct shall be sealed to prevent entrance of outside air and possible dilu-
tion or redirection of smoke within the duct. 

viii.  Where in-duct smoke detectors are installed in concealed locations more than 
3 m above the finished floor or in arrangements where the detector’s alarm or 
supervisory indicator is not visible to responding personnel, the detectors shall 
be provided with remote alarm or supervisory indication in a location within 
the room. 

ix.  Remote alarm or supervisory indicators shall be installed in an accessible loca-

tion and shall be clearly labeled to indicate both their function and the air-
handling unit(s) associated with each detector. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 473 of 1348 

 

 

Figure 8.7.: Smoke detectors at Return Air Louvers 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 474 of 1348 

4.2.  Smoke Detection System 

 
4.2.1.  The Smoke Detection and Alarm System shall comply with Table 8.2. and the General 

Requirements of Fire Detection and Alarm System as per Table 8.1. 

 

 

 

 

Table 8.2: Smoke Detection and Alarm Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. IONIZATION TYPE 

i. 

SMOKE              

DETECTORS (FOR 

INFORMATION 

ONLY. NOT                  

ACCEPTABLE IN 

UAE) 

An ionization smoke detector has a very small amount of radioactive materi-
al (an alpha emitter) that ionizes the air in the sensing chamber, rendering 
the air conductive and permitting a minute current flow through the air be-
tween two charged electrodes. This gives the sensing chamber an effective 
electrical conductance. When smoke particles enter the ionization area, 
they decrease the conductance of the air by attaching themselves to the 
ions, causing a reduction in ion mobility. The current flow is monitored and 
when conductance is below a predetermined level, the detector is in alarm.  

ii.  With analog addressable detectors the alarm threshold can be varied to 

compensate for ambient conditions. 

2. PHOTOELECTRIC 

i. 

TYPE SMOKE  

DETECTORS 

ii. 

iii. 

The presence of suspended smoke particles generated during the combus-
tion process affects the propagation of a light beam passing through the air. 
The effect can be utilized to detect the presence of a fire in two ways:                                              
a. obscuration of light intensity over the beam path OR                                               
b. scattering of the light beam.  
Smoke detectors that operate on the principle of light obscuration consist of 
a light source, a light beam collimating system, and a photosensitive device. 
When dense smoke obscures part of the light beam, or less dense smoke 
obscures more of the beam, the light reaching the photosensitive device is 
reduced and this initiates the alarm.  
In Smoke detectors using Scattering of light principle, when smoke particles 
enter a light path, scattering results. Smoke detectors utilizing the photoe-
lectric light-scattering principle are usually of the spot type. They contain a 
light source and a photosensitive device arranged so the light rays normally 
do not fall onto the device. When smoke particles enter the light path, light 
strikes the particles and is scattered onto the photosensitive device, causing 
the detector to respond. 

3. SELECTION OF 

i. 

SMOKE                

DETECTORS 

The selection and placement of smoke detectors shall take into account 
both the performance characteristics of the detector and the areas into 
which the detectors are to be installed to prevent nuisance and unintention-
al alarms or improper operation after installation. 

4. AMBIENT                

i. 

CONDITION 

Smoke detectors shall not be installed where following conditions exist.            
a.  Temperature is below 00C.                                                                                        
b. Temperature is above 380C.                                                                                          
c. Relative Humidity is above 93%. d. Air velocity is greater than 1.5 m/sec   
(300 ft./min). 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 475 of 1348 

 

Table 8.2: Spot Type Smoke  Detection and Alarm Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

5. LOCATION 

i. 

ii. 

6. SENSITIVITY 

i. 

ii. 

iii. 

The location of smoke detectors shall be based on an evaluation of potential 
ambient sources of smoke, moisture, dust, or fumes, and electrical or mechani-
cal influences, to minimize nuisance alarms. 
In addition to temperature, humidity, and velocity variations, smoke detectors 
are also affected by common environmental conditions as mechanical vibration, 
electrical interference, presence of aerosols and other environmental influ-
ences. Tests for these conditions are also conducted by the testing laboratories 
in their listing program. Manufacturers' installation guidelines shall be followed 
for location details. 

Smoke detectors shall be marked with their nominal production sensitivity and 
tolerance in percent per foot (percent per meter) obscuration, as required by 
the listing.  
Smoke detectors that have provision for field adjustment of sensitivity shall 
have an adjustment range of not less than 0.6 percent per foot (1.95 percent 
per meter) obscuration. 
If the means of adjustment of sensitivity is on the detector, a method shall be 
provided to restore the detector to its factory calibration. 

iv.  Detectors that have provision for program controlled adjustment of sensitivity 

shall be permitted to be marked with their programmable sensitivity range only. 

7. HIGH AIR 

MOVEMENT 

AREAS 

i. 

ii. 

Smoke detectors shall not be located directly in the airstream of supply regis-
ters. 
Smoke detector spacing in high air movement areas shall be in accordance with 
Table 8.2.a.  

Table 8.2.a.: Smoke Detector Spacing Based on Air Movement 

MINUTES PER AIR CHANGE  AIR CHANGES PER HOUR 

SPACING PER DETECTOR 

1 Minute 

2 Minutes 

3 Minute 

4 Minute 

5 Minute 

6 Minute 

7 Minute 

8 Minute 

9 Minute 

10 Minute 

 

 

60 

30 

20 

15 

12 

10 

8.6 

7.5 

6.7 

6 

 

 

11.61 

23.23 

34.84 

46.45 

58.06 

69.68 

81.29 

83.61 

83.61 

83.61 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 476 of 1348 

4.3.  Installation and Spacing of Spot Type Smoke Detection System 

 
4.3.1.  The Installation and Spacing of Spot Type Smoke Detection and Alarm System shall 

comply with Table 8.3., Spot Type Smoke Detection System as per Table 8.2. and the 
General Requirements Fire Detection and Alarm System as per Table 8.1. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Table 8.3: Installation and Spacing of Spot Type Smoke Detection  

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. INSTALLATION 

AND SPACING 

OF SPOT TYPE 

SMOKE            

DETECTORS 

1. GENERAL 
 
i. 

The location and spacing of smoke detectors shall be based upon the anticipat-
ed smoke flows due to the plume and ceiling jet produced by the anticipated 
fire, as well as any pre-existing ambient airflows that could exist in the protect-
ed compartment. 

ii.  Detector location and spacing shall take into consideration the following fea-

tures.                                                                                                                                     
a. Ceiling shape and surface.                                                                                                  
b. Ceiling height.                                                                                                                       
c. configuration of material content in the area.                                                               
d. combustion characteristics of the fuel load in the area.                                              
e. compartment ventilation.                                                                                                   
f. Ambient temperature, pressure, altitude, humidity and atmosphere. 
If the intent is to protect against specific hazard, detectors shall be placed closer 
to the hazard, than required by the spacing guidelines 

iii. 

 
2. SMOOTH CEILINGS 
 
i. 
ii. 

Spot type detectors shall be placed on the ceiling. 
Spot-type smoke detectors shall be located on the ceiling not less than 100 mm 
from a sidewall to the near edge. 

iii.  Detectors shall not be installed on sidewall as regular practice. Where whole 

areas are covered by ceiling mounted detectors and corner areas are desired to 
be protected, detectors shall be mounted on sidewalls at 300 mm down from 
the ceiling to the top of the detector. 

iv.  The distance between smoke detectors shall not exceed a nominal spacing (S) 

v. 

of 9 m. 
There shall be detectors within a distance of one-half the nominal spacing, 
measured at right angles from all walls or partitions extending upward in sloped 
ceilings or towards center to within the top 15 percent of the ceiling height. 

vi.  All points on the ceiling shall have a detector within a distance equal to or less 

than 0.7 times the nominal 9 m spacing, S. (0.7S). 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 477 of 1348 

 

 

 

Figure 8.8.: Spacing of Spot Type Smoke Detector on Smooth Ceilings 

 

 

Figure 8.9.: Spacing of Spot Type Smoke Detector on corner of Smooth Ceilings 

Did You Know? 

Ionization Type Smoke Detectors tend to produce more false 

alarms and fail in their sensitivity 7 times sooner than a Photo-

electric Type Smoke Detector. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 478 of 1348 

 

Table 8.3: Installation and Spacing of Spot Type Smoke Detection  

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. INSTALLATION 

AND SPACING 

OF SPOT TYPE 

3. UNDER RAISED FLOORS 
 
i. 

SMOKE             

ii. 

DETECTORS 

Under raised floors having void height of 300 cm or more, or with cable runs 
and service piping and cuts shall be provided with smoke detection system. 
To minimize dust contamination, smoke detectors, where installed under 
raised floors, shall be mounted only in an orientation for which they have been 
listed. 

iii.  Spaces beneath raised floors and above suspended ceilings shall be treated as 

separate rooms for smoke detector spacing purposes. Detectors installed be-
neath raised floors or above suspended ceilings, or both, including raised floors 
and suspended ceilings used for environmental air, shall not be used in lieu of 
providing detection within the room. Spacing shall be as per Smooth Ceiling 
requirements. 

 
4. CEILINGS WITH SOLID JOISTS AND BEAM CONSTRUCTION 
 
i. 

ii. 

Solid joists shall be considered equivalent to beams for smoke detector spacing 
guidelines. 
For ceilings with beam pockets formed by intersecting beams including waffle 
or pan type ceilings, of depths of less than 10% of ceiling or ceilings with beam 
depths of less than 10% of the ceiling height (0.1 H), smooth ceiling spacing 
shall be permitted. Spot-type smoke detectors shall be permitted to be located 
on ceilings or on the bottom of beams. 

iii.  For ceilings with beam pockets formed by intersecting beams including waffle 
or pan type ceilings, of depths of equal to/more than 10% of ceiling height or 
ceilings with beam depths equal to or greater than 10% of the ceiling height 
(0.1 H), the following shall apply:                                                                                                   
a. Where beam spacing is equal to or greater than 40 percent of the ceiling 
height (0.4 H), spot-type detectors shall be located on the ceiling in each beam 
pocket.                                                                                                                                  
b. Where beam spacing is less than 40 percent of the ceiling height (0.4 H), the 
following shall be permitted for spot detectors:                                                                                     
1. Smooth ceiling spacing in the direction parallel to the beams and at one-half 
smooth ceiling spacing in the direction perpendicular to the beams.                              
2. Location of detectors either on the ceiling or on the bottom of the beams. 

iv.  For corridors 4.6 m in width or less having ceiling beams or solid joists perpen-
dicular to the corridor length, the following shall apply: a.  Smooth ceiling spac-
ing shall be permitted. b. Location of spot-type smoke detectors on ceilings, 
sidewalls, or the bottom of beams or solid joists. 
For rooms of 84 m2 or less, the following shall be permitted:                                            
a. Use of smooth ceiling spacing                                                                                              
b. Location of spot-type smoke detectors on ceilings or on the bottom of 
beams. 

v. 

 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 479 of 1348 

 

 
 
 

Figure 8.10.: Not Acceptable Detector orientation under raised floor 

Figure 8.11.: Acceptable Detector orientation under raised floor 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 480 of 1348 

 

 
 
 

Figure 8.12.: Smoke Detector Spacing and Location in Joists and beams with spacing greater than 40% of ceiling height 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 481 of 1348 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 8.13.: Smoke Detector Spacing at Joists and Beams spacing less than 40% of ceiling height 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 482 of 1348 

 

Table 8.3: Installation and Spacing of Spot Type Smoke Detection  

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. INSTALLATION 

AND SPACING 

OF SPOT TYPE 

SMOKE            

DETECTORS 

 

5. SLOPED CEILING, BEAMS RUNNING PARALLEL 
 
i. 

For sloped ceiling with beams running parallel up slope, the following shall ap-
ply.                                                                                                                                            
a. Spot-type detector(s) shall be located on the ceiling within beam pocket(s).            
b.  The ceiling height shall be taken as the average height over slope.                             
c. Spacing shall be measured along a horizontal projection of the ceiling.                      
d. Smooth ceiling spacing shall be permitted within beam pocket(s) parallel to 
the beams.                                                                                                                                           
e. For beam depths less than or equal to 10% of the ceiling height (0.1 H), spot-
type detectors shall be located with smooth ceiling spacing perpendicular to the 
beams.                                                                                                                                           
f. For beam depths greater than 10% of the ceiling height (0.1 H), the following 
shall apply for spacing perpendicular to the beams:                                                                     
1. For beam spacing greater than or equal to 40% of the ceiling height (0.4 H), 
spot-type detectors shall be located in each beam pocket.                                                         
2. For beam spacing less than 40% of the ceiling height (0.4 H), spot-type detec-
tors shall not be required in every beam pocket but shall be spaced not greater 
than 50 percent of smooth ceiling spacing. 

 
6. SLOPED CEILING, BEAMS RUNNING PARPENDICULAR 
 
i. 

For sloping ceilings with beams running perpendicular across slope, the follow-
ing shall apply:                                                                                                                                   
a. Spot-type detector(s) shall be located at the bottom of the beams.                            
b. The ceiling height shall be taken as the average height over slope.                              
c. Spacing shall be measured along a horizontal projection of the ceiling.                      
d. Smooth ceiling spacing shall be permitted within beam pocket(s).                              
e. For beam depths less than or equal to 10% of the ceiling height (0.1 H), spot-
type detectors shall be located with smooth ceiling spacing.                                                      
f. For beam depths greater than 10% of the ceiling height (0.1 H), spot-type de-
tectors shall not be required to be located closer than (0.4 H) and shall not ex-
ceed 50 % of smooth ceiling spacing. 

 
7.  SLOPED CEILING, BEAM POCKETS FORMED BY INTERSECTING BEAMS 
 
i. 

For sloped ceilings with beam pockets formed by intersecting beams, the fol-
lowing shall apply:                                                                                                                                   
a. Spot-type detector(s) shall be located at the bottom of the beams.                             
b. The ceiling height shall be taken as the average height over slope.                              
c. Spacing shall be measured along a horizontal projection of the ceiling.                      
d. For beam depths less than or equal to 10% of the ceiling height (0.1 H), spot-
type detectors shall be spaced with not more than three beams between detec-
tors and shall not exceed smooth ceiling spacing.                                                                                
e. For beam depths greater than 10% of the ceiling height (0.1 H), spot-type de-
tectors shall be spaced with not more than two beams between detectors, but 
shall not be required to be spaced closer than (0.4 H), and shall not exceed 50% 
of smooth ceiling spacing. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 483 of 1348 

 

Table 8.3: Installation and Spacing of Spot Type Smoke Detection  

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. INSTALLATION 

AND SPACING 

OF SPOT TYPE 

SMOKE DE-

TECTORS 

ii. 

8.  PEAKED CEILINGS 
 
i. 

Detectors shall first be spaced and located within 910 mm of the peak, meas-
ured horizontally. The number and spacing of additional detectors, if any, shall 
be based on the horizontal projection of the ceiling. 
For a roof slope of less than 30 degrees, all detectors shall be spaced using the 
height at the peak. For a roof slope of greater than 30 degrees, the average 
slope height shall be used for all detectors other than those located in the peak. 

 
9.  SHEDS 
 
i. 

Detectors shall first be spaced and located within 910 mm of the peak, meas-
ured horizontally. The number and spacing of additional detectors, if any, shall 
be based on the horizontal projection of the ceiling. 

2. PROHIBITED 

i. 

LOCATIONS 

ii. 

Smoke detectors shall not be installed within 3 m radial distance along horizon-
tal path from cooking appliances. 
Smoke detectors shall not be located within 1 m of the bathroom having show-
er or bathtub. 

iii.  Smoke detectors shall not be installed within a 910 mm horizontal path from 

the tip of the blade of a ceiling-suspended (paddle) fan. 

 

 

 

Figure 8.14.: Spot Type Smoke Detector Spacing and Location at Sheds and Peaked ceiling 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 484 of 1348 

4.4.  Installation and Spacing of Beam Type (Projected Beam) Smoke 

Detection System 
 
4.4.1.  The Installation and Spacing of Beam Type Smoke Detection and Alarm System shall 
comply with Table 8.4., Smoke Detection Systems as per Table 8.2. and the General 
Requirements of Fire Detection and Alarm System as per Table 8.1. 

 

 

 

 

Table 8.4: Installation and Spacing of Beam Type Detection Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. INSTALLATION 

i. 

AND SPACING 

OF BEAM 

Projected beam–type smoke detectors shall be located in accordance with the 
manufacturer’s published instructions. 
The effects of stratification shall be evaluated when locating the detectors. 

ii. 
iii.  The beam length shall not exceed the maximum permitted by the equipment 

TYPE SMOKE       

listing. 

DETECTORS 

iv.  On smooth ceilings, a spacing of not more than 18.3 m between projected 

beams and not more than one-half that spacing between a projected beam and 
a sidewall (wall parallel to the beam travel) should be used as a guide. 

v.  Other spacing should be determined based on ceiling height, airflow character-

istics, and response requirements. In some cases, the light beam projector is 
mounted on one end wall, with the light beam receiver mounted on the oppo-
site wall. However, it is also permitted to suspend the projector and receiver 
from the ceiling at a distance from the end walls not exceeding one-quarter the 
selected spacing (S).  
If mirrors are used with projected beams, the mirrors shall be installed in ac-
cordance with the manufacturer’s published instructions. 

vi. 

vii.  A projected beam–type smoke detector shall be considered equivalent to a row 

of spot-type smoke detectors for level and sloping ceiling applications. 

viii.  Projected beam–type detectors and mirrors shall be mounted on stable surfac-

es to prevent false or erratic operation due to movement. 

ix.  The beam shall be designed so that small angular movements of the light 

source or receiver do not prevent operation due to smoke and do not cause 
nuisance or unintentional alarms. 

x.  The light path of projected beam–type detectors shall be kept clear of opaque 

obstacles at all times. 

2. VERIFICATION 

OF ALARM 

i.  Where the light path of a projected beam–type detector is abruptly interrupted 
or obscured, the unit should not initiate an alarm. It should give a trouble signal 
after verification of blockage. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 485 of 1348 

 

 

 

Figure 8.15.: Beam Projection Type Smoke Detection Spacing 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 486 of 1348 

4.5.  Installation and Spacing of Aspiration Type Air Sampling  Smoke 

Detection System 
 
4.5.1.  The Installation and Spacing of Aspiration Type Air Sampling Smoke Detection and 

Alarm System shall comply with Table 8.5., Smoke Detection Systems as per Table 8.2. 
and the General Requirements Fire Detection and Alarm System as per Table 8.1. 

 

Table 8.5: Installation of Aspiration Type Air Sampling Smoke Detection Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. INSTALLATION 

AND SPACING OF 

ASPIRATION 

TYPE AIR          

SAMPLING 

SMOKE            

DETECTION       

SYSTEM 

i. 

ii. 

Each sampling port of an air sampling–type smoke detector shall be treated 
as a spot-type detector for the purpose of location and spacing. 
Sampling pipe networks shall be designed on the basis of, and shall be sup-
ported by, sound fluid dynamic principles to ensure required performance. 
iii.  Manufacturer’s listed design guideline and calculation software shall be fol-

lowed. 

iv.  Sampling pipe network design details shall include calculations showing the 

flow characteristics of the pipe network and each sample port. 

v.  Air-sampling detectors shall give a trouble signal if the airflow is outside the 

manufacturer’s specified range. 

vi.  The sampling ports and in-line filter, if used, shall be kept clear in accord-

ance with the manufacturer’s published instructions. 

vii.  Air-sampling network piping and fittings shall be airtight and permanently 

fixed. 

viii.  Where practicable, pipe run lengths in a multiple-pipe system should be 
nearly equal, or the system should be otherwise pneumatically balanced. 
ix.  The air sampling–type detector system should be able to withstand dusty 
environments by air filtering, electronic discrimination of particle size, or 
other listed methods or combinations thereof.  

x.  The detector should be capable of providing optimal time delays of alarm 
outputs to eliminate nuisance alarms due to transient smoke conditions. 

xi.  The detector should also provide facilities for the connection of monitoring 
equipment for the recording of background smoke level information neces-
sary in setting alert and alarm levels and delays. 

xii.  In cold room applications the detector unit shall be installed outside the sub 

zero temperature areas. Installation of piping shall be such that condensa-
tion does not occur inside the piping. 

xiii.  Detector shall be able to connect in a Class A wiring method. 
xiv.  In-line filter used on the pipe network shall be included in the listing for the 

air-sampling type smoke detector. 

xv.  Sampling system piping shall be conspicuously identified as “SMOKE DETEC-

TOR SAMPLING TUBE — DO NOT DISTURB,” as follows:                                                    
a.  At changes in direction or branches of piping                                                        
b.  At each side of penetrations of walls, floors, or other barriers                           
c.  At intervals on piping that provide visibility within the space, but no 
greater than 6.1 m. 

2.  AIR SAMPLE 

i.  Maximum air sample transport time from the farthest sampling port to the 

detector shall not exceed 120 seconds. 

TRANSPORT 

TIME 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 487 of 1348 

 

 

 

 

Figure 8.16..: Air Sampling Type Smoke Detection for Meat Storage Freezers 

 

Figure 8.17.: Air Sampling Type Smoke Detection for Freezer Rooms 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 488 of 1348 

4.6.  Heat Detection and Alarm System 

 
4.6.1.  The Heat Detection and Alarm System shall comply with Table 8.6., and the General 

Requirements for Fire Detection and Alarm System as per Table 8.1. 

 

 

 

Table 8.6: Heat Detection System 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. HEAT DETECTION 

i. 

SYSTEM 

Heat detectors shall include in their installation instructions, technical data, 
and listing documentation the operating temperature and Response Time 
Index (RTI) as determined by the organization listing the device. 

ii.  All heat sensing detectors shall be approved and listed by Civil Defence. The 

CoC shall clearly state the end use application of the Heat detectors. 

2.  OPERATING       

i. 

TEMPERATURE 

Heat-sensing fire detectors shall be marked with their listed operating tem-
perature. 

ii.  Heat-sensing fire detectors where the alarm threshold is field adjustable 

shall be marked with the temperature range. 

iii.  Spot Type heat detectors shall be marked with their RTI. 

3.  FIXED               

i. 

TEMPERATURE 

HEAT DETECTORS 

ii. 

Fixed-temperature heat detectors are designed to alarm when the tempera-
ture of the operating element reaches a specified point. The air tempera-
ture at the time of alarm can be considerably higher than the rated temper-
ature (depending on the fire growth rate), because it takes time for the air 
to raise the temperature of the operating element to its set point. This con-
dition is called thermal lag. 
Fusible Link Type heat detectors made up of eutectic metals are used as a 
solder to secure a spring under tension. When the element fuses, the spring 
action closes contacts and initiates an alarm. Eutectic metals cannot be re-
stored; either the device or its operating element must be replaced upon 
actuation. 

iii.  Continuous Line Type detection uses a pair of steel wires in a normally open 

circuit. The conductors are held apart by a heat-sensitive insulation. The 
wires, under tension, are enclosed in a braided sheath to form a single cable 
assembly. When the design temperature is reached, the insulation melts, 
the two wires contact, and an alarm is initiated. Following an alarm, the 
fused section of the cable must be replaced to restore the system. 

4.  RATE                 

i. 

COMPENSATION 

DETECTORS 

A rate compensation detector is a device that responds when the tempera-
ture of the surrounding air reaches a predetermined level, with the rate of 
temperature rise having minimal effect on response (low thermal lag). Typi-
cal rate compensation type is spot type heat detectors. 

5.  RATE-OF-RISE 

i. 

HEAT DETECTORS 

The rate-of-rise detector, however, will function when the rate of tempera-
ture increase exceeds a predetermined value, typically around 12 to 15°F (7 
to 8°C) per minute. Rate-of-rise detectors are designed to compensate for 
the normal changes in ambient temperature (less than 12°F *6.7°C+ per mi-
nute) that are expected under nonfire conditions. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 489 of 1348 

Table 8.6: Heat Detection System 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

6.  ELECTRONIC 

i. 

SPOT TYPE 

HEAT         

DETECTORS 

A thermoelectric effect detector is a device that utilizes a sensing element con-
sisting of one or more thermistors, which produce a change in electrical re-
sistance in response to an increase in temperature. This change in resistance is 
monitored by associated electronic circuitry, and the detector responds when the 
resistance changes at an abnormal rate (rate-of-rise type) or when the resistance 
reaches a specific value (fixed-temperature type). 

7.  COLOR 

i.  Heat-sensing fire detectors of the fixed temperature or rate-compensated, spot 

CODING OF 

HEAT      

DETECTORS 

ii. 

type shall be marked with a color code in accordance with Table  8.6.a. 
If the overall color of a heat-sensing fire detector is the same as the color code 
marking required for that detector, one of the following arrangements, applied in 
a contrasting color and visible after installation, shall be employed:                                                                                                                   
a. Ring on the surface of the detector                                                                             
b. Temperature rating in numerals at least 9.5mm high. 

iii.  Detectors having fixed-temperature or rate-compensated elements shall be se-

lected in accordance with Table  8.6.a., for the maximum expected ambient ceil-
ing temperature. The temperature rating of the detector shall be at least 11°C 
above the maximum expected temperature at the ceiling. 

Table 8.6.a.: Color Coding of Heat Detectors 

TEMPERATURE 

HEAT DETECTOR TEMPER-

MAXIMUM CEILING 

COLOR CODE 

CLASSIFICATION 

ATURE RATING RANGE 

TEMPERATURE 

1. Low 

2. Ordinary 

3. Intermediate 

4. High 

5. Extra High 

6. Very Extra High 

7. Ultra High 

39 0C—57 0C 

58 0C—79 0C 

80 0C—121 0C 

122 0C—162 0C 

163 0C—204 0C 

205 0C—259 0C 

260 0C—302 0C 

 

 

28 OC 

47 OC 

69 OC 

111 OC 

152 OC 

194 OC 

249 OC 

Uncolored 

Uncolored 

White 

Blue 

Red 

Green 

Orange 

 

 

Figure 8.18.: Spot Type Heat Detector Color Coding and Marking 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 490 of 1348 

4.7.  Installation and Spacing of Spot Type Heat Detection System 

 
4.7.1.  The Installation and Spacing of Spot Type Smoke Detection and Alarm System shall 

comply with Table 8.7., Heat Detection System as per Table 8.6. and the General Re-
quirements for Fire Detection and Alarm System as per Table 8.1. 

 

Table 8.7.: Installation and Spacing of Spot Type Heat Detection Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  INSTALLATION 

AND SPACING 

OF SPOT TYPE 

HEAT                  

DETECTORS 

1.  GENERAL 
 
i. 

The location and spacing of heat detectors shall be based upon pre-existing 
ambient temperature that could exist in the protected compartment. 

ii.  Detector location and spacing shall take into consideration the following fea-

tures.                                                                                                                                      
a. Ceiling shape and surface.                                                                                                  
b. Ceiling height.                                                                                                                       
c. configuration of material content in the area.                                                               
d. combustion characteristics of the fuel load in the area.                                              
e. compartment ventilation.                                                                                                   
f. Ambient temperature, pressure, altitude, humidity and atmosphere. 
If the intent is to protect against specific hazard, detectors shall be placed 
closer to the hazard, than required by the spacing guidelines 
In general, shall be located on the ceiling not less than 100 mm from the side-
wall. Where ceiling coverage is adequate and detectors are required on side-
walls, they shall be installed on the sidewalls between 100 mm and 300 mm 
from the ceiling. 

iii. 

iv. 

 
2.  SMOOTH CEILINGS 
 
i. 

The distance between detectors shall not exceed their listed spacing, and 
there shall be detectors within a distance of one-half the listed spacing, meas-
ured at right angles from all walls or partitions extending upward to within the 
top 15 percent of the ceiling height. 

ii.  All points on the ceiling shall have a detector within a distance equal to or less 

than that of their listing specifications. 

 
3.  IRREGULAR CEILINGS 
 
i. 

For irregularly shaped areas, the spacing between detectors shall be per-
mitted to be greater than the listed spacing, provided that the maximum spac-
ing from a detector to the farthest point of a sidewall or corner within its zone 
of protection is not greater than 0.7 times the listed spacing. 

 
4.  CEILINGS WITH SOLID JOIST CONSTRUCTION 
 
i. 

The design spacing of heat detectors, where measured at right angles to the 
solid joists, shall not exceed 50 percent of the listed spacing. 
In the case of solid joist construction, detectors shall be mounted at the 
bottom of the joists. 

ii. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 491 of 1348 

 

Figure 8.19.: Spacing of Heat Detectors on Smooth Ceiling 

 
 

 

Figure 8.20.: Spacing of Heat Detectors on Irregular Ceiling 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 492 of 1348 

Table 8.7.: Installation and Spacing of Spot Type Heat Detection Systems 
 

ITEMS 

 

1. INSTALLATION 

 

AND SPACING 

OF SPOT TYPE 

 

HEAT          

DETECTORS 

 

REQUIREMENTS 

 

5.  CEILINGS WITH BEAM CONSTRUCTION 
 
i. 

 
A ceiling shall be treated as a smooth ceiling if the beams project no more than 
100 mm below the ceiling. 
 
ii.  Where the beams project more than 100 mm below the ceiling, the spacing of 
spot-type heat detectors at right angles to the direction of beam travel shall be 
not more than two-thirds of the listed spacing (S). 

iii.  Where the beams project more than 460 mm below the ceiling and are more 

than 2.4 m on center, each bay formed by the beams shall be treated as a sepa-
rate pocket area. 

iv.  Where beams are less than 300 mm in depth and less than 2.4 m on center, 

detectors shall be permitted to be installed on the bottom of beams. 

 
6..SLOPED CEILINGS WITH PEAKS OR SHEDS 
 
i. 

For a ceiling slope of less than 30 degrees, all detectors shall be spaced using 
the height at the peak. 

ii.  All detectors, other than those located in the peak, shall be spaced using the 

average slope height or the height of the peak. 

iii.  Spacing shall be measured along a horizontal projection of the ceiling in accord-

ance with the type of ceiling construction. 

iv.  A row of detectors shall first be located at or within 910 mm of the peak of the 

ceiling. 

v.  Additional detectors shall be spaced ceiling slope degree. 
 
7.  HIGH CEILINGS 
 
i.  On ceilings 3 m to 9.1 m high, heat detector spacing shall be reduced in accord-

ance with Table 8.7.a.  prior to any additional reductions for beams, joists, or 
slope, where applicable. 

Table 8.7.a.: Reduction in Heat Detector Spacing based on Ceiling Height 

CEILING HEIGHT 

MULTIPLY LISTED SPACING BY THIA FACTOR 

1. 0 m—3 m 

2. >3 m—3.7 m 

3. >3.7 m—4.3 m 

4. >4.3 m—4.9 m 

5. >4.9 m—5.5 m 

6. >5.5 m—6.1 m 

7. >6.1 m—6.7 m 

8. >6.7 m—7.3 m 

9. >7.3 m—7.9 m 

10. >7.9 m—8.5 m 

11. >8.5 m—9.1 m 

 

1.00 

0.91 

0.84 

0.77 

0.71 

0.64 

0.58 

0.52 

0.46 

0.40 

0.34 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 493 of 1348 

4.8.  Installation and Spacing of Line Type Heat Detection System 

 
4.8.1.  The Installation and Spacing of Line Type Smoke Detection and Alarm System shall 

comply with Table 8.8., Heat Detection System as per Table 8.6. and the General Re-
quirements for Fire Detection and Alarm System as per Table 8.1. 

 

 

 

Table 8.8.: Installation and Spacing of Line Type Heat Detection Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. INSTALLATION 

AND SPACING 

OF LINE TYPE 

1.  GENERAL 
 
i. 

HEAT          

DETECTORS 

ii. 

The line type detector shall be listed and approved by Civil Defence, including 
its mounting accessories and hardware as assembly. 
The location and spacing of heat detectors shall be based upon pre-existing am-
bient temperature that could exist in the protected compartment. 

iii.  Detector location and spacing shall take into consideration the following fea-

tures.                                                                                                                                     
a. Ceiling shape and surface.                                                                                                  
b. Ceiling height.                                                                                                                       
c. configuration of material content in the area.                                                               
d. combustion characteristics of the fuel load in the area.                                              
e. compartment ventilation.                                                                                                   
f. Ambient temperature, pressure, altitude, humidity and atmosphere. 

iv.  The detector shall produce trouble signal during short circuits and open ends, 

v. 

vi. 

not alarm signal. 
If the intent is to protect against specific hazard, detectors shall be placed clos-
er to the hazard, than required by the spacing guidelines 
In general, line-type heat detectors shall be located on the ceiling or on the 
sidewalls not more than 510 mm from the ceiling. 

vii.  Maximum spacing of line type detector shall not exceed 15.2 m. up to 3 m of 

the ceiling height or the hazard protected. 

viii.  Spacing shall be reduced to 9.1 m when installed above 3m from ceiling or the 

hazard protected. 

 
2.  EXTERIOR INSTALLATONS 
 
i.  Where line type detectors are installed outdoors and exterior areas, the ambi-

ent temperature on detector or its mounting surfaces will increase. Shielding of 
the detector shall be required to comply with detector temperature ratings and 
its application. 

ii.  Outdoor installations of line type detectors, to safeguard from wind and 

storms,  shall be secured with additional fasteners/hangers/hooks than recom-
mended by the manufacturer in general areas. 

 
3.  OTHER APPLICATIONS 
 
i.  Manufacturer’s listed design guide and manual shall be followed for spacing, 

location and installation methods for other applications such as Conveyers, 
Rack storage, Cable trenches, Fuel oil Tanks etc. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 494 of 1348 

 

 

 
 

Figure 8.21.: Spacing of Line Type Heat Detectors on Cable Treys 

Figure 8.22.: Line Type Heat Detectors on Fuel Tanks 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 495 of 1348 

4.9.  Flame Detection System (Radiant Energy-Sensing Fire Detection) 

 
4.9.1.  The Design, Installation and Spacing of Flame Detection and Alarm System (Radiant 
Energy-Sensing Detection) shall comply with Table 8.9., and the relevant General Re-
quirements for Fire Detection and Alarm System as per Table 8.1. 

 

Table 8.9.: Design, Installation and Spacing of Flame Detection Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  DESIGN,          

INSTALLATION 

AND SPACING 

OF FLAME/

i.  The type and quantity of radiant energy–sensing fire detectors shall be deter-
mined on the basis of the performance characteristics of the detector and an 
analysis of the hazard, including the burning characteristics of the fuel, the fire 
growth rate, the environment, the ambient conditions, and the capabilities of 
the extinguishing media and equipment.  

RADIANT        

ii.  The selection of the radiant energy–sensing detectors shall be based on the 

ENERGY       

SENSING        

DETECTORS 

2.  WORKING     

PRINCIPLES 

following:                                                                                                                                     
a. Matching of the spectral response of the detector to the spectral emissions 
of the fire or fires to be detected.                                                                                          
b. Minimizing the possibility of spurious nuisance alarms from non-fire sources 
inherent to the hazard area. 

i.  Ultraviolet flame detectors typically use a vacuum photodiode Geiger–Muller 
tube to detect the ultraviolet radiation that is produced by a flame. The photo-
diode allows a burst of current to flow for each ultraviolet photon that hits the 
active area of the tube. When the number of current bursts per unit time 
reaches a predetermined level, the detector initiates an alarm. 

ii.  A spark/ember-sensing detector usually uses a solid state photodiode or pho-
totransistor to sense the radiant energy emitted by embers, typically between 
0.5 microns and 2.0 microns in normally dark environments. These detectors 
can be made extremely sensitive (microwatts), and their response times can be 
made very short (microseconds). 

iii. The greater the angular displacement of the fire from the optical axis of the 

detector, the larger the fire must become before it is detected. This phenome-
non establishes the field of view of the detector. Figure 8.16. shows example 
of the effective sensitivity versus angular displacement of a flame detector. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 8.23.: Normalized Sensitivity vs. Angular Displacement. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 496 of 1348 

Table 8.9.: Design, Installation and Spacing of Flame Detection Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

2. SPACING 

i.  Radiant energy–sensing fire detectors shall be employed consistent with the 

listing or approval and the inverse square law, which defines the fire size versus 
distance curve for the detector. 

ii.  Detector quantity shall be based on the detectors being positioned so that no 

point requiring detection in the hazard area is obstructed or outside the field of 
view of at least one detector. 

iii. The location and spacing of detectors shall be the result of an engineering evalua-
tion that includes the following:                                                                                         
a. Size of the fire that is to be detected                                                                            
b. Fuel involved                                                                                                                      
c. Sensitivity of the detector                                                                                               
d. Field of view of the detector                                                                                           
e. Distance between the fire and the detector                                                                 
f. Radiant energy absorption of the atmosphere                                                            
g. Presence of extraneous sources of radiant emissions                                               
h. Purpose of the detection system                                                                                      
i. Response time required. 

iv. In applications where the fire to be detected could occur in an area not on the 
optical axis of the detector, the distance shall be reduced or detectors shall be 
added to compensate for the angular displacement of the fire in accordance with 
the manufacturer’s published instructions. 

v.  Because flame detectors are line-of-sight devices, their ability to respond to the 

required area of fire in the zone that is to be protected shall not be compromised 
by the presence of intervening structural members or other opaque objects or 
materials. 

vi. Provisions shall be made to sustain detector window clarity in applications where 

airborne particulates and aerosols coat the detector window between mainte-
nance intervals and affect sensitivity. 

vii.Radiant energy–sensing detectors shall not be placed in protective housings (e.g., 
behind glass) to keep them clean, unless such housings are listed for the purpose. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 8.24.: Radiant Energy Detectors installed at Fuel Tank Yard 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 497 of 1348 

4.10.  Manual Fire Alarm Initiating System (Manual Call Points) 

 
4.10.1.  The Design, Installation and Spacing of Manual Fire Alarm Initiating Devices shall com-

ply with Table 8.10., and the relevant General Requirements for Fire Detection and 
Alarm System as per Table 8.1. 

Table 8.10.: Design, Installation and Spacing of Manual Fire Alarm Initiating Devices  

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  DESIGN,          

INSTALLATION 

AND SPACING 

OF MANUAL 

i.  Manually actuated alarm-initiating devices shall be securely mounted. 
ii.  Manually actuated alarm-initiating devices shall be mounted on a background 

of contrasting color. 

iii.  The operable part of a manually actuated alarm initiating device shall be at 

1200  m from the finished floor. 

FIRE ALARM 

iv.  Manually actuated alarm-initiating devices shall be permitted to be single ac-

INITIATING  

SYSTEMS 

v. 

tion or double action. 
Listed protective covers shall be permitted to be installed over single- or dou-
ble-action manually actuated alarm initiating  devices.  

vi.  Manual fire alarm boxes shall be used only for fire alarm initiating purposes. 
vii.  Manual fire alarm boxes shall be installed so that they are conspicuous, unob-

structed, and accessible. 

viii.  Unless installed in an environment that precludes the use of red paint or red 

plastic, manual fire alarm boxes shall be red in color. 

ix.  Manual fire alarm boxes shall be located within 1.5 m of each exit doorway on 

each floor. 

x.  Additional Fire Alarm boxes shall be installed such that maximum travel dis-

tance to nearest Fire Alarm box shall not exceed 61 m, measured horizontally 
on the same floor. 

xi.  Manual fire alarm boxes shall be mounted on both sides of grouped openings 

over 12.2 m in width, and within 1.5 m of each side of the grouped opening. 

 

 

Figure 8.24.: Installation of Manual Call Points 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 498 of 1348 

4.11.  Wireless or Radio Frequency based Fire Alarm Systems 

 
4.11.1.  The Design, Installation and Spacing of Wireless or Radio frequency based Fire Alarm 
System shall comply with Table 8.11., and the relevant General Requirements Fire De-
tection and Alarm System as per Table 8.1. 

 

 

Table 8.11.: Design, Installation and Spacing of Wireless Systems  

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  DESIGN,          

i.  Wireless Fire Alarm Systems shall be listed and approved by Civil Defence as a 

INSTALLATION 

AND SPACING 

OF WIRELESS 

full system assembly including low power radio equipment, transmitters, receiv-
ers, Detectors, Control Units and accessories. 

ii.  Wireless Fire Alarm Systems shall be addressable, pin-pointing exact device initi-

ating alarm or in trouble condition or has battery failure. 

FIRE ALARM 

iii. The Control Unit shall be capable of interfacing with wired Analogue addressa-

SYSTEMS 

ble Fire Alarm Systems. 

2. POWER           

i.  A primary battery(s) (dry cell) shall be permitted to be used as the sole power 

SUPPLIES 

source for devices incorporating a low-power radio transmitter/transceiver 
where all of the following conditions are met:                                                            
a. Each transmitter/transceiver shall serve only one device and shall be individu-
ally identified at the system control unit.                                                                     
b. The battery(s) shall be capable of operating the low power radio transmitter/
transceiver and its associated device for not less than 1 year before the battery 
depletion threshold is reached.                                                                                      
c. A low battery signal shall be transmitted before the device is no longer capa-
ble of providing 15 days of trouble signal operation followed by the signaling of 
a single nontrouble response. The low battery signal shall be distinctive from 
alarm, supervisory, tamper, and trouble signals, shall visibly identify the affected 
low-power radio transmitter/transceiver, and, when silenced, shall automatical-
ly re-sound at least once every 4 hours.                                                                       
d. Catastrophic (open or short) battery failure shall cause a trouble signal identi-
fying the affected low-power radio transmitter/transceiver at the system control 
unit. When silenced, the trouble signal shall automatically re-sound at least 
once every 4 hours.                                                                                                           
e. Any mode of failure of a primary battery in a low-power radio transmitter/
transceiver shall not affect any other low-power radio transmitter/transceiver. 

3. ALARM SIGNAL 

i.  When a wireless initiating device is actuated, its low power radio transmitter/

transceiver shall automatically transmit an alarm signal. 

ii.  Response time shall occur within 10 seconds after the activation of an initiating 

device. 

iii. Each low-power radio transmitter/transceiver shall automatically repeat alarm 
transmissions at intervals not exceeding 60 seconds until the initiating device is 
returned to its non-alarm condition. 

iv. Fire alarm signals shall be distinctive, clearly recognizable, and shall be indicated 

as follows in descending order of priority, a. Signals associated with life safety. 
b. Signals associated with property protection. c. Trouble signals associated with 
life and/or property protection. d. All other signals 

v. A fire alarm signal from a low-power radio transmitter/transceiver shall latch at 

its system control unit until it is manually reset. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 499 of 1348 

Table 8.11.: Design, Installation and Spacing of Wireless Systems  

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

4.  MONITORING 

i.  Single loss of transmission network shall not affect the communication and 

FOR INTEGRITY 

alarm signal transmission. The transmission network shall be backed up by se-
ries of loops and redundant alternate transmission paths. 

ii.  The low-power radio transmitter/transceiver shall be specifically listed as using 
a communication method that is highly resistant to misinterpretation of simulta-
neous transmissions and to interference (e.g., impulse noise and adjacent chan-
nel interference). 

iii. The occurrence of any single fault that disables communication between any 
low-power radio transmitter/transceiver and the receiver/transceiver system 
control unit shall cause a latching trouble signal within 200 seconds at the sys-
tem control unit that individually identifies the affected device. 

iv. A single fault on the signaling channel shall not cause an alarm signal. 
v.  Removal of a low-power radio transmitter/ transceiver from its installed loca-

tion shall cause immediate transmission of a distinctive trouble signal that indi-
cates its removal and individually identifies the affected device. 

vi. Reception of any unwanted (interfering) transmission by a retransmission de-

vice or by the receiver system control unit for a continuous period of 20 seconds 
or more shall cause an audible and visible trouble indication at the system con-
trol unit, identifying it as specific interfering trouble condition. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 8.25.: Typical Radio Communicated Fire Alarm System Network 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 500 of 1348 

4.12.  Other Fire Detectors 

 
4.12.1.  The Design, Installation and Spacing of Other Fire Detectors shall comply with Table 

8.12., and the relevant General Requirements Fire Detection and Alarm System as per  
Table 8.1. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Table 8.12.: Design, Installation and Spacing of Other Fire Detectors 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  MULTI SENSORS 

i.  Because of the device-specific, software-driven solution of multi-criteria de-
tectors to reduce unwanted alarms and improve detector response to a non-
specific fire source, location and spacing criteria included with manufacturer’s 
guidelines and listed design manual shall be followed. 

2. GAS DETECTORS 

i.  Gas detection (Other than LP Gas detection) shall be designed and installed as 

per manufacturer’s listed design guidelines. 

ii.  LP Gas detection and Alarm system shall be as per Chapter 11. Fire Safety 

Guidelines for Liquefied Petroleum Gas Installations. 

iii. Gas detection equipment shall be listed for the specific gas or vapor it is in-

tended to detect. 

iv. Any gas detection systems installed on a fire alarm system shall comply with 

all the applicable requirements of this Code. 

v.  The requirements of this Code shall not apply to gas detection systems used 

solely for process control. 

vi. The selection and placement of the gas detectors shall be based on an engi-

neering evaluation. 

3.  VIDEO IMAGE 

i.  Video image Fire detection systems and all of the components thereof, includ-

FIRE DETECTORS  

ing hardware and software, shall be listed for the purpose of Fire detection. 
ii.  Systems shall be designed in accordance with a performance-based design 

approach. 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 501 of 1348 

5.   Application of Fire Detection and Alarm Systems  

 

5.1. 

The application of Fire Detection and Alarm System based on the building type and occu-
pancy  shall be as per Table 8.13., Auxiliary Rooms and Spaces Fire Detection and Alarm as 
per Table 8.14., and Equipment s Fire Detection and Alarm as per Table 8.15., shall be 
provided. 

 

Table 8.13: Application of Fire Detection and Alarm System 

BUILDING / OCCUPANCY  APPLICABLE FIRE DETECTION AND ALARM SYSTEMS 

1.  SUPER  HIGHRISE BUILDING 

i. 

Smoke Detection and Alarm System shall be provided throughout 
the building as per Section 4.3. 

2.  HIGHRISE BUILDING   

ii.  Fire Pump, all building fire suppression systems, Fire Water Level, 

LP Gas detection, CO Monitoring and other interconnected sys-
tems like door release, Elevator recall, Smoke Control etc. shall be 
interfaced with Fire Detection and Alarm System, based on build-
ing fire strategy, as per Section 4.1. 

iii.  Main FACP shall be located at the continuously attended location 

such as Emergency Command Centre or Reception or Security 
guard house, as per the building fire strategy. 

iv.  Additional Sub FACP’s or Annunciators complete with all function-
al features shall be provided at the elevator lobby of the floor or 
the mechanical floor at every 45 m height of the building and con-
nected to main FACP in a network. 

v.  Activation of the Fire Detection and Alarm System shall only trig-

ger 5 floors of evacuation alarm, at fire floor, 3 floors above and at 
1 floor below. General Fire Alarm shall not be required to trigger 
entire building evacuation alarm or general Fire Alarm. Security or 
facility management personnel or authorized person shall intimate 
the occupants on Voice Alarm System/Public Address System 
about the situation. 

vi.  Positive Alarm Sequence (Positive Alarm Delay) as per Table 

8.1.14.2, shall be followed. If the alarm is not silenced by author-
ized personnel or FACP is not reset within 15 seconds, or multiple 
alarms are triggered from other initiating devices within 180 se-
conds,  then the entire fire floor, entire floors above fire floor and 
1 floor below fire floor shall have evacuation alarm. Security or 
facility management personnel or authorized person shall intimate 
the occupants on Voice Alarm System/Public Address System 
about the situation. 

vii.  If the alarm is not silenced by authorized personnel or FACP is not 
reset or multiple alarms are triggered from other initiating devices 
within 240 seconds,  then the entire building shall have evacuation 
alarm. Security or facility management personnel or authorized 
person shall intimate the occupants on Voice Alarm System/Public 
Address System about the situation. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 502 of 1348 

Table 8.13: Application of Fire Detection and Alarm System 

BUILDING /  OCCUPANCY  APPLICABLE FIRE DETECTION AND ALARM SYSTEMS 

3. MIDRISE BUILDINGS  

i. 

Smoke Detection and Alarm System shall be provided throughout 
the building as per Section 4.3. 

4. LOWRISE BUILDINGS 

ii.  Fire Pump, all building fire suppression systems, Fire Water Level, 

LP Gas detection, CO Monitoring and other interconnected systems 
like door release, Elevator recall, Smoke Control etc. shall be inter-
faced with Fire Detection and Alarm System, based on building fire 
strategy, as per Section 4.1. 

iii.  Main FACP shall be located at the continuously attended location 

such as Emergency Command Centre or Reception or Security 
guard house, as per the building fire strategy. 

iv.  Positive Alarm Sequence (Positive Alarm Delay) as per Table 

8.1.14.2, shall be followed. If the Fire Detection Alarm is not si-
lenced by authorized personnel or FACP is not reset or multiple 
alarms are triggered from other initiating devices within 180 se-
conds,  then the entire building shall have evacuation alarm.  

9.   ASSEMBLY BUILDINGS 

i. 

Smoke Detection and Alarm System shall be provided throughout 
the building as per Section 4.3. 

10. BUSINESS BUILDINGS 

ii.  Fire Pump, all building fire suppression systems, Fire Water Level, 

11. RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS 

12. DAY CARE BUILDINGS 

13. MERCANTILE 

LP Gas detection, CO Monitoring and other interconnected systems 
like door release, Elevator recall, Smoke Control etc. shall be inter-
faced with Fire Detection and Alarm System, based on building fire 
strategy, as per Section 4.1. 

iii.  Auxiliary Rooms and Spaces Fire Detection and Alarm System as per 

Table 8.14., and Equipment s Fire Detection and Alarm System as 
per Table 8.15., shall be provided. 

iv.  Positive Alarm Sequence (Positive Alarm Delay) as per Table 

8.1.14.2, shall be followed. If the general Fire alarm is not silenced 
by authorized personnel or FACP is not reset or multiple alarms are 
triggered from other initiating devices within 180 seconds, evacua-
tion fire alarm shall be triggered throughout. 

14. EXISTING PRIVATE VILLAS 

i. 

Smoke Detection and Alarm System shall be provided throughout 
the building as per Section 4.3. 

OR 
i.  Wireless /Low powered radio frequency based Fire Detection and 

Alarm System shall be provided in each villa as per Section 4.11. 

ii.  Auxiliary Rooms and Spaces Fire Detection and Alarm System as per 

Table 8.14., and Equipment s Fire Detection and Alarm System as 
per Table 8.15., shall be provided. 

iv. 

iii.  Main FACP OR the cluster radio HUB shall be located at the continu-
ously attended location such as reception or Security guard house. 
 Each villa shall be provided with audio visual notification devices 
outside such that notification devices are visible from the common 
approach road. 

(G+1) CONVERTED TO  

NURSERIES,  
DAY CARE CENTERS, 
RESTAURANTS, 
SHOW ROOMS, 
BOUTIQUES, 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 503 of 1348 

Table 8.13: Application of Fire Detection and Alarm System 

 

BUILDING /     

APPLICABLE FIRE DETECTION AND ALARM SYSTEMS 

OCCUPANCY 

15.  EDUCATION     

i. 

BUILDINGS 

Smoke Detection and Alarm System shall be provided throughout the building 
as per Section 4.3. 

ii.  Auditoriums, Gymnasiums, Cafeteria, Laboratories and indoor swimming pools 

shall be provided with Heat Detection System as per Section 4.6. 

iii.  Fire Pump, all building fire suppression systems, Fire Water Level, LP Gas detec-
tion, CO Monitoring and other interconnected systems like door release, Eleva-
tor recall, Smoke Control etc. shall be interfaced with Fire Detection and Alarm 
System, based on building fire strategy, as per Section 4.1. 

iv.  Auxiliary Rooms and Spaces Fire Detection and Alarm System as per Table 

8.14., and Equipment s Fire Detection and Alarm System as per Table 8.15., 
shall be provided. 

v.  Main FACP shall be located at the continuously attended location such as Emer-
gency Command Centre or Reception or Security guard house, as per the build-
ing fire strategy. 

vi.  An annunciator panel shall be located inside the Principal’s office. 
vii.  A total evacuation alarm initiating switch shall be provided at the Principal’s 

office, in addition to the emergency evacuation public address system. Positive 
Alarm Sequence (Positive Alarm Delay) as per Table 8.1.14.2, shall be followed. 

viii. Student recall signal shall be distinct from fire alarm or any other signal. 
ix.  Manual Call points shall be permitted to be enclosed with listed cover box. 

16.  HEALTHCARE  

i. 

BUILDINGS 

Smoke Detection and Alarm System shall be provided throughout the building 
as per Section 4.3. 

ii.  Fire Pump, all building fire suppression systems, Fire Water Level, LP Gas detec-
tion, CO Monitoring and other interconnected systems like door release, Eleva-
tor recall, Smoke Control etc. shall be interfaced with Fire Detection and Alarm 
System, based on building fire strategy, as per Section 4.1. 

iii.  Auxiliary Rooms and Spaces Fire Detection and Alarm System as per Table 

8.14., and Equipment s Fire Detection and Alarm System as per Table 8.15., 
shall be provided. 

iv.  Main FACP shall be located at the continuously attended location such as Emer-
gency Command Centre or Reception or Security guard house, as per the build-
ing fire strategy. 

v.  Additional annunciators shall be located at nurse stations strategically through-

out the facility. 

vi.  General Fire Alarm shall not trigger evacuation alarm and interconnected sys-
tems such as elevator recall, HVAC Shutdown, door release operations etc. in 
the facility. 

vii.  Nurse stations /Staff areas shall be provided with evacuation alarm initiating 

bush button or switch within 61 m from the nurse station. 

viii. Positive Alarm Sequence (Positive Alarm Delay) as per Table 8.1.14.2, shall be 

followed. 

ix.  Activation of the nurse evacuation push button shall trigger evacuation alarm 
and interconnected systems such as elevator recall, HVAC Shutdown, door re-
lease operations etc. as per building fire strategy. 
In critical care areas, such as operation theatres, ICU’s, in lieu of audible notifi-
cation devices, visual notification devices shall be permitted. 

x. 

xi.  The Fire Alarm zoning shall coincide with building smoke compartment s or 

 

zones. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 504 of 1348 

 

Table 8.13: Application of Fire Detection and Alarm System 

BUILDING /         

APPLICABLE FIRE DETECTION AND ALARM SYSTEMS 

OCCUPANCY 

17. DETENTION 

AND              

CORRECTIONAL       

i.  Aspiration Type Air Sampling Smoke Detection System shall be provided 

throughout inmates cells, prison sleeping areas as per Section  4.5. 

ii.  Smoke Detection and Alarm System shall be provided throughout , Office, 

maintenance, Day rooms, and Activity rooms monitored by continuously by 
staff and areas other than prison cells and inmates areas of the building as per 
Section 4.3. 

iii.  Smoke detectors shall be permitted to be installed in exhaust ducts from cells 

and behind grills of cells. 

iv.  Manual fire alarm boxes shall be permitted to be locked, provided that staff is 
present within the area when it is occupied and staff has keys readily available 
to unlock the boxes. 

v.  Auditoriums, Gymnasiums, Cafeteria and indoor swimming pools shall be pro-

vided with Heat Detection System as per Section 4.6. 

vi.  Fire Pump, Fire Water Level, LP Gas detection, CO Monitoring and other inter-
connected systems like door release, Elevator recall, Smoke Control etc. shall 
be interfaced with Fire Detection and Alarm System, based on building fire 
strategy, as per Section 4.1. 

vii.  Auxiliary Rooms and Spaces Fire Detection and Alarm System as per Table 

8.14., and Equipment s Fire Detection and Alarm System as per Table 8.15., 
shall be provided. 

viii. Main FACP shall be located at the continuously attended location such as 

Emergency Command Centre or Supervisor or Security guard house, as per 
the building fire strategy. 

ix.  General Fire Alarm shall not trigger evacuation alarm and interconnected sys-
tems such as elevator recall, HVAC Shutdown, door release operations etc. in 
the facility. 

x.  Supervisor/Staff areas shall be provided with evacuation alarm initiating bush 

button or switch for evacuation alarm and Civil Defence notification. 

xi.  Positive Alarm Sequence (Positive Alarm Delay) as per Table 8.1.14.2, shall be 

followed. 

xii.  Activation of evacuation push button shall trigger evacuation alarm and inter-
connected systems such as elevator recall, HVAC Shutdown, door release op-
erations etc. as per building fire strategy. 

i. 

Smoke Detection and Alarm System shall be provided throughout the building 
as per Section 4.3. 

ii.  Fire Pump, all building fire suppression systems, Fire Water Level, LP Gas de-
tection, CO Monitoring and other interconnected systems like door release, 
Elevator recall, Smoke Control etc. shall be interfaced with Fire Detection and 
Alarm System, based on building fire strategy, as per Section 4.1. 

iii.  Auxiliary Rooms and Spaces Fire Detection and Alarm System as per Table 

8.14., and Equipment s Fire Detection and Alarm System as per Table 8.15., 
shall be provided. 

iv.  Main FACP shall be located at the continuously attended location such as 

Emergency Command Centre or Reception Desk or Security guard house, as 
per the building fire strategy. 

v.  An annunciator panel shall be located at the Reception Desk. 
vi.  A total evacuation alarm initiating switch shall be provided at the Reception 

Desk. 

vii.  General Fire Alarm shall not trigger evacuation alarm. 
viii. Positive Alarm Sequence (Positive Alarm Delay) as per Table 8.1.14.2, shall be 

followed. 

ix.  If the alarm is not silenced by authorized personnel or FACP is not reset or 

multiple alarms are triggered from other initiating devices within 120 se-
conds, evacuation alarm shall be triggered throughout. 

BUILDINGS 

18. HOTEL        

BUILDINGS 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 505 of 1348 

 

Table 8.13: Application of Fire Detection and Alarm System 

BUILDING /

APPLICABLE FIRE DETECTION AND ALARM SYSTEMS 

OCCUPANCY 

19. STORAGE AND 

i. 

WAREHOUSE 

20. INDUSTRIAL       

BUILDINGS 

Smoke Detection and Alarm System shall be provided throughout as per Sec-
tion 4.3. 

ii.  Fire Pump, all building fire suppression systems, Fire Water Level, LP Gas de-
tection, CO Monitoring and other interconnected systems like door release, 
Elevator recall, Smoke Control etc. shall be interfaced with Fire Detection and 
Alarm System, based on building fire strategy, as per Section 4.1. 

iii.  Auxiliary Rooms and Spaces Fire Detection and Alarm System as per Table 

8.14., and Equipment s Fire Detection and Alarm System as per Table 8.15., 
shall be provided. 

v. 

iv.  In a single tenant warehouse, main FACP shall be located at the continuously 
attended location such as Emergency Command Centre or Supervisor or Secu-
rity guard house, as per the building fire strategy. 
In multi-tenant warehouse, a single main FACP shall be permitted to monitor 
all the warehouses in the group and FACP’s for individual warehouses shall 
not be required. Such main FACP shall be located at the security guard house 
or the facility management office. 

vi.  Each warehouse shall be provided with audio visual notification devices out-

side such that notification devices are visible from the common entrance. 

vii.  General Fire Alarm shall be the evacuation alarm. 

21. COLD STORAGE 

i.  Aspiration Type Air Sampling Smoke Detection System shall be provided inside 

freezer and cold room areas as per Section  4.5. 

ii.  Smoke Detection and Alarm System shall be provided throughout , Office, 

maintenance, store room areas of the building as per Section 4.3. 

22. ENCLOSED    

i.  No Fire Detectors are required if the enclosed parking is provided fully with 

PARKING 

 

automatic sprinkler System. 

ii.  Where enclosed parking is provided with automatic sprinkler system, Manual 

Fire Detection and Alarm System shall be provided as per Section 4.10.  

iii.  Where enclosed parking is not provided with automatic sprinkler system, Heat 

Detection and Alarm System shall be provided as per Section 4.7. 

iv.  Audio Visual notification devices shall be provided throughout the parking are-

as. 

v.  Fire Pump, all building fire suppression systems, Fire Water Level, LP Gas de-
tection, CO Monitoring and other interconnected systems like door release, 
Elevator recall, Smoke Control etc. shall be interfaced with Fire Detection and 
Alarm System, based on building fire strategy, as per Section 4.1. 

vi.  Auxiliary Rooms and Spaces Fire Detection and Alarm System as per Table 

8.14., and Equipment s Fire Detection and Alarm System as per Table 8.15., 
shall be provided. 

vii.  General Fire Alarm shall not trigger be the evacuation alarm. 
viii. If the general fire alarm is not silenced by authorized personnel or FACP is not 
reset or multiple alarms are triggered from other initiating devices within 120 
seconds, evacuation alarm shall be triggered throughout. 

23. ROBOTIC OR    

i.  Aspiration Type Air Sampling Smoke Detection System shall be provided 

throughout vehicle stacking and storing areas as per Section  4.5. 

ii.  Smoke Detection and Alarm System shall be provided throughout , Office, 

maintenance, reception, store rooms areas of the building as per Section 4.3. 

MECHANICAL 

PARKING OR   

ROBOTIC          

LOGISTICS 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 506 of 1348 

Table 8.13: Application of Fire Detection and Alarm System 

BUILDING /

APPLICABLE FIRE DETECTION AND ALARM SYSTEMS 

OCCUPANCY 

24. COVERED 

i. 

MALL 

Smoke Detection and Alarm System shall be provided throughout the building 
as per Section 4.3. 

ii.  Fire Pump, all building fire suppression systems, Fire Water Level, LP Gas detec-
tion, CO Monitoring and other interconnected systems like door release, Eleva-
tor recall, Smoke Control etc. shall be interfaced with Fire Detection and Alarm 
System, based on building fire strategy, as per Section 4.1. 

iii.  Auxiliary Rooms and Spaces Fire Detection and Alarm System as per Table 

8.14., and Equipment s Fire Detection and Alarm System as per Table 8.15., 
shall be provided. 

iv.  Main FACP shall cover the entire mall through sub FACP’s distributed strategi-

cally throughout in a network to coincide with Fire Evacuation Zoning of the 
mall as per mall fire strategy. 

v.  Main FACP shall be located at the continuously attended location such as Emer-
gency Command Centre or Mall management office or Security guard house, as 
per the building fire strategy. 

vi.  Individual tenant spaces shall not be required to have individual FACP’s. Sub 

FACP’s provided by the mall in strategic locations shall monitor the tenant 
spaces’ detectors. 

vii.  An annunciator panel shall be located at all the Mall Information Desks. 
viii. Positive Alarm Sequence (Positive Alarm Delay) as per Table 8.1.14.2, shall be 

followed. 

x. 

ix.  General fire alarm from a single tenant space shall trigger evacuation alarm on-
ly in that particular tenant space and not the mall evacuation alarm nor the fire 
zone evacuation alarm. 
If the single tenant evacuation alarm is not silenced by authorized personnel or 
FACP is not reset or multiple alarms are triggered from other initiating devices 
within 180 seconds,  then the particular fire zone evacuation alarm shall be trig-
gered. Security or mall management personnel or authorized person shall inti-
mate the occupants on Voice Alarm System/Public Address System about the 
situation. 

xi.  Visual Display Notification with messages shall be permitted along with Voice 

Speakers and Public address Systems. 

25. COMMERCIAL 

i. 

Smoke Detection and Alarm System shall be provided in each villa as per Sec-
tion 4.3.                                                                                                    

OR   
i.  Wireless /Low powered radio frequency based Fire Detection and Alarm System 

shall be provided in each villa as per Section 4.11. 

ii.  Auxiliary Rooms and Spaces Fire Detection and Alarm System as per Table 

8.14., and Equipment s Fire Detection and Alarm System as per Table 8.15., 
shall be provided. 

iii.  Main FACP OR the cluster radio HUB shall be located at the continuously 

attended location such as Emergency Command Centre or facility management 
office or Security guard house (or even at developer’s office in case of wireless/
radio system), as per the building fire strategy. 

iv.  Each villa shall be provided with audio visual notification devices outside such 

that notification devices are visible from the common approach road. 

VILLA 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 507 of 1348 

Table 8.13: Application of Fire Detection and Alarm System 

BUILDING /

APPLICABLE FIRE DETECTION AND ALARM SYSTEMS 

OCCUPANCY 

26. PRIVATE VILLA 

i. 

Smoke Detection and Alarm System shall be provided in each villa as per 
Section 4.3.                                                                                                    

OR   
i.  Wireless /Low powered radio frequency based Fire Detection and Alarm 

System shall be provided in each villa as per Section 4.11. 

ii.  Auxiliary Rooms and Spaces Fire Detection and Alarm System as per Table 

8.14., and Equipment s Fire Detection and Alarm System as per Table 8.15., 
shall be provided. 

iii.  FACP OR the monitoring panel shall be located at the continuously attended 

location. 

iv.  Each villa shall be provided with audio visual notification devices outside 

such that notification devices are visible from the common approach road. 

27. PETROL AND GAS 

i. 

STATIONS 

Smoke Detection and Alarm System shall be provided throughout the Mini 
Mart, Retails, Restaurants, Dining Areas, Service Stations as per Section 4.3. 

ii.  Fire Pump, all building fire suppression systems, Fire Water Level, LP Gas 

detection, CO Monitoring and other interconnected systems, if any, shall be 
interfaced with Fire Detection and Alarm System, based on building fire 
strategy, as per Section 4.1. 

iii.  Auxiliary Rooms and Spaces, if any, Fire Detection and Alarm System as per 
Table 8.14., and Equipment s Fire Detection and Alarm System as per Table 
8.15., shall be provided. 

iv.  Main FACP shall cover the entire Petrol/Gas Station complex . FACP’s for 

individual tenants shall not be required.  

v.  Main FACP shall be located at the continuously attended location such as 
management office or Security guard house or at Mini Mart cash counter, 
as per the building fire strategy. 

vi.  General fire alarm from a single tenant space shall trigger evacuation alarm 

only in that particular tenant space. 

vii.  If the alarm is not silenced by authorized personnel or FACP is not reset or 

multiple alarms are triggered from other initiating devices within 180 se-
conds,  then the complex evacuation alarm shall be triggered. 

viii. Audio/Visual Notification devices shall be provided outside each tenant out-

lets. 

28. NURSERY (PLANTS 

i. 

Fire Detection and Alarm System shall not be required. 

AND                 

VEGETATION) 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 508 of 1348 

5.   Application of Fire Detection and Alarm Systems  

 

5.2. 

The application of Fire Detection and Alarm System for auxiliary rooms and spaces shall be 
as per Table 8.14.  

Table 8.14: Auxiliary Rooms and Spaces Fire Detection and Alarm System 

BUILDING / OCCUPANCY  APPLICABLE FIRE DETECTION AND ALARM SYSTEMS 

1.  ATRIUM 

i.  Projected Beam Smoke Detection and Alarm System shall be pro-

 

vided to cover atrium as per Section 4.4.  

OR 
i.  Aspiration Type Air Sampling Smoke Detection System shall be 

provided as per Section  4.5. 

2. ANESTHETIZING ROOM 

i. 

Smoke Detection and Alarm System shall be provided to  as per 
Section 4.4.  

OR 
i.  Aspiration Type Air Sampling Smoke Detection System shall be 

provided as per Section  4.5. 

3. OPERATION ROOM 

i.  Aspiration Type Air Sampling Smoke Detection System shall be 

provided as per Section  4.5. 

4. BATTERY CHARGER ROOM 

i.  Heat Detection and Alarm System shall be provided as per         

Section 4.7.  

5. BATTERY ROOM 

i.  Heat Detection and Alarm System shall be provided as per         

Section 4.7.  

AND 
i. 

6. BMS ROOM 

7. COMPUTER ROOM 

ii. 

i. 

i. 

Flame Detection and Alarm System shall be provided as per         
Section 4.9.  
(In addition, listed Hydrogen detectors shall be provided) 

Smoke Detection and Alarm System shall be provided as per     
Section 4.4.  

Smoke Detection and Alarm System shall be provided as per     
Section 4.4.  

OR 
i.  Aspiration Type Air Sampling Smoke Detection System shall be 

provided as per Section  4.5. 

8. DIESEL GENERATOR ROOM 

i.  Heat Detection and Alarm System shall be provided as per         

Section 4.7.  

9. ELECTRICAL ROOM 

i. 

Smoke Detection and Alarm System shall be provided as per     
Section 4.4.  

10. AHU ROOM 

11. LV ROOM 

i.  Multi-sensors shall be provided as per Table 8.12.1.  

i. 

Smoke Detection and Alarm System shall be provided as per     
Section 4.4.  

OR 
i.  Aspiration Type Air Sampling Smoke Detection System shall be 

provided as per Section  4.5. 

12. LIFT MACHINE ROOM 

i.  Multi-sensors shall be provided as per Table 8.12.1.  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 509 of 1348 

Table 8.14: Auxiliary Rooms and Spaces Fire Detection and Alarm System 

 

BUILDING / OCCUPANCY  APPLICABLE FIRE DETECTION AND ALARM SYSTEMS 

13. SERVER ROOMS 

i. 

Smoke Detection and Alarm System shall be provided to  as per 
Section 4.4.  

OR 
i.  Aspiration Type Air Sampling Smoke Detection System shall be 

provided as per Section  4.5. 

14. STAIR 

i.  At least one smoke detector shall be installed at the top of the stair 

of a non-highrise building as per Section 4.3. 

ii.  In Highrise and Super Highrise buildings, along with one smoke de-
tector at the top of the shaft, multiple smoke detectors at interme-
diate landings, every 23 m, shall be provided as per Section 4.3. 

15. ELEVATOR SHAFT 

i.  At least one smoke detector shall be installed at the top of the ele-

vator shaft of a non-highrise building as per Section 4.3. 

ii.  In Highrise and Super Highrise buildings, along with one smoke de-
tector at the top of the shaft, multiple smoke detectors at interme-
diate levels, every 23 m vertically in the shaft, shall be provided as 
per Section 4.3. 

16. ABOVE FALSE CEILING   

SPACES  HAVING VOID 

HEIGHT OF MORE THAN  

80 CM 

i. 
Smoke Detectors shall be provided in the void as per Section 4.3. 
ii.  Remote response indicators shall be provided throughout to iden-

tify alarm status of concealed detectors. 

iii.  However, above false ceiling detectors shall not be required 

where such voids are inaccessible voids. 

17. BELOW RAISED FLOOR   

HAVING VOID HEIGHT OF 

MORE THAN 30 CM OR 

WHERE CABLE RUNS  AND 

DUCTING ARE INSTALLED 

i. 
Smoke Detectors shall be provided in the void as per Section 4.3. 
ii.  Remote response indicators shall be provided throughout to iden-

tify alarm status of concealed detectors. 

18. ENCLOSED SPACES HAVING 

i.  Projected Beam Detection System shall be provided as per          

HEIGHT MORE THAN  10 M 

TO LESS THAN 20 M FROM 

 

FINISHED FLOOR  LEVEL 

Section 4.4. 

19. ENCLOSED SPACES HAVING 

i.  Aspiration Type Air Sampling Detection System shall be provided 

HEIGHT MORE THAN  20 M 

FROM FINISHED FLOOR   

 

LEVEL 

as per Section 4.5. 

20.  PUBLIC BATHROOMS  

i.  Heat Detection and Alarm System shall be provided as per         

HAVING AREA MORE 
THAN  5 M2 

Section 4.7.  

21. LAUNDRY 

22. STORAGE ROOM 

i. 

i. 

Smoke Detectors shall be provided in the void as per Section 4.3. 

Smoke Detectors shall be provided in the void as per Section 4.3. 

23. PANTRY 

i.  Heat Detection and Alarm System shall be provided as per         

Section 4.7.  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 510 of 1348 

Table 8.14: Auxiliary Rooms and Spaces Fire Detection and Alarm System 

BUILDING /               

APPLICABLE FIRE DETECTION AND ALARM SYSTEMS 

OCCUPANCY 

24. PUMP ROOM 

i.  Heat Detector shall be provided as per Section 4.7.   

25. GARBAGE ROOM 

i.  Heat Detector shall be provided as per Section 4.7.   

26. BEDROOM 

27. LIVING ROOM 

i. 

i. 

Sounder based Smoke Detector shall be provided as per Section 4.3. 

Smoke Detector shall be provided as per Section 4.3. 

28. OPEN KITCHEN 

i.  Detectors specifically listed for Kitchen shall be provided as per their 

listing specifications. 

OR 
i.  Heat Detector in the kitchen shall be provided as per Section 4.7.  
along with Smoke Detector, 3 m away from the Kitchen counter, in 
the living room shall be provided as per Section 4.3. 

OR 
i.  Multisensors specifically listed for Kitchen shall be provided as per   

Table 8.12.1. 

29. CLOSED KITCHEN 

i.  Detectors specifically listed for Kitchen shall be provided as per their 

listing specifications. 

OR 
i.  Heat Detector in the kitchen shall be provided as per Section 4.7.   

30. CORRIDOR 

i. 

Smoke Detector shall be provided as per Section 4.3. 

31. TEMPORARY KIOSKS 

i.  Battery Operated Smoke Detectors, listed and approved by Civil De-

fence shall be provided. 

32. TEMPORARY TENTS 

i.  Battery Operated Smoke Detectors, listed and approved by Civil De-

fence shall be provided. 

33. TEMPORARY           

i. 

Smoke Detector shall be provided as per Section 4.3. 

MODULAR HOUSES/

OFFICES 

34. FOOD TRUCKS 

i.  Heat Detector shall be provided as per Section 4.7. 

35. MERCANTILE TRUCKS 

i.  Heat Detector shall be provided as per Section 4.7. 

36. BUILDING ROOFS 

i.  Building roofs used for restaurant seating, assembly and as Sheesha 

bars shall be provided with Manual Fire Detection and Alarm System, 
as per Section 4.10. 

37. OPEN STORAGE  SHEDS 

i.  Manual Fire Detection and Alarm System, as per Section 4.10. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 511 of 1348 

5.   Application of Fire Detection and Alarm Systems  

 

5.3. 

The application of Fire Detection and Alarm System for equipment shall be as per               
Table 8.15.  

Table 8.15: Equipment Fire Detection and Alarm System 

BUILDING / OC-

APPLICABLE FIRE DETECTION AND ALARM SYSTEMS 

CUPANCY 

1. KITCHEN HOOD  

i. 

Fusible Link Heat Detection and Alarm System shall be provided as per       
Section 4.6. (Pre-engineered Systems shall be acceptable) 

2. LPG TANKS 

i. 
LP Gas Detection and Alarm System shall be provided as per  Chapter 11. 
ii.  LP Gas detection control panel shall be interfaced with Fire Detection and 

Alarm Control Panel. 

iii.  The triggering of deluge water spray for the LP Gas tank shall be through fol-

lowing means. 
a.  LP Gas detection from the LP Gas tank area. 
b.  Fire Detection from roof and one floor below. 
c.  Cross zoned fire detection from rest of the building. 
d.  Manual actuation of deluge water spray from  LP Gas detection control 

panel. 

3. FLAMMABLE  

LIQUID TANKS 

i. 

Intrinsically Safe Flame (Radiant Energy) Detection and Alarm System shall be 
provided as per Section 4.9. and as per Risk assessment proposed and 
stamped by the Civil Defence approved House of Expertise. 
ii. 
 
AND 
i. 

Intrinsically Safe Linear Type Heat Detection System shall be provided on the 
tank roof  as per Section 4.8. and as per Risk assessment proposed and 
stamped by the Civil Defence approved House of Expertise. 

4. CABLE SPREAD 

i.  Aspirated Type Air Sampling Smoke Detection System shall be provided for 

AREAS 

the room ceiling as per Section 4.5. 

AND 
i. 

Linear Type Heat Detection System shall be provided on the cable trays as per 
Section 4.8. 

5. DIESEL GENERA-

i.  Heat Detection and Alarm System shall be provided as per Section 4.7. 

TORS AREA 

6. BOILERS AREA 

i.  Heat Detection and Alarm System shall be provided as per Section 4.7. 

7. COOLING     

TOWERS 

i. 

Linear Type Heat Detection System shall be provided on the cable trays as per 
Section 4.8. 

8. TRANSFORMERS         
i. 

Linear Type Heat Detection System shall be provided on the cable trays as per 
Section 4.8. 

9. BULK OIL                 

i. 

STORAGE 

Intrinsically Safe Flame (Radiant Energy) Detection and Alarm System shall be 
provided as per Section 4.9. and as per Risk assessment proposed and 
stamped by the Civil Defence approved House of Expertise. 

AND 
i. 

Intrinsically Safe Linear Type Heat Detection System shall be provided on the 
tank roof  as per Section 4.8. and as per Risk assessment proposed and 
stamped by the Civil Defence approved House of Expertise. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 512 of 1348 

Table 8.15: Equipment Fire Detection and Alarm System 

BUILDING / OCCUPANCY  APPLICABLE FIRE DETECTION AND ALARM SYSTEMS 

10. BULK FLAMMABLE LIQUID 

i. 

STORAGE 

Intrinsically Safe Flame (Radiant Energy) Detection and Alarm Sys-
tem shall be provided as per Section 4.9. and as per Risk assess-
ment proposed and stamped by the Civil Defence approved House 
of Expertise. 

AND 
i. 

Intrinsically Safe Linear Type Heat Detection System shall be pro-
vided on the tank roof  as per Section 4.8. and as per Risk assess-
ment proposed and stamped by the Civil Defence approved House 
of Expertise. 

11. BULK FLAMMABLE LIQUID 

i. 

STORAGE 

Intrinsically Safe Flame (Radiant Energy) Detection and Alarm Sys-
tem shall be provided as per Section 4.9. and as per Risk assess-
ment proposed and stamped by the Civil Defence approved House 
of Expertise 

AND 
i. 

Intrinsically Safe Linear Type Heat Detection System shall be pro-
vided on the tank roof  as per Section 4.8. and as per Risk assess-
ment proposed and stamped by the Civil Defence approved House 
of Expertise 

12. BULK FLAMMABLE GAS 

i. 

STORAGE 

Intrinsically Safe Flame (Radiant Energy) Detection and Alarm Sys-
tem shall be provided as per Section 4.9. 

AND 
i.  Gas Detection (Particular Type) and Alarm System shall be provid-
ed as per Risk assessment proposed and stamped by the Civil De-
fence approved House of Expertise 

13. BULK FLAMMABLE SOLID 

i. 

STORAGE 

Fire Detection and Alarm Systems shall be based on comprehen-
sive Risk assessment and shall be proposed and stamped by the 
Civil Defence approved House of Expertise. 

14. HIGH HAZARD LOGISTICS 

i. 

15. CHEMICAL WAREHOUSES 

i. 

Fire Detection and Alarm Systems shall be based on comprehen-
sive Risk assessment and shall be proposed and stamped by the 
Civil Defence approved House of Expertise. 

Fire Detection and Alarm Systems shall be based on comprehen-
sive Risk assessment and shall be proposed and stamped by the 
Civil Defence approved House of Expertise. 

16. ARMS,  AMMUNITION,    

i. 

EXPLOSIVES 

Fire Detection and Alarm Systems shall be based on comprehen-
sive Risk assessment and shall be proposed and stamped by the 
Civil Defence approved House of Expertise. 

17. PROCESSING, GENERATING 

i. 

PLANTS 

Fire Detection and Alarm Systems shall be based on comprehen-
sive Risk assessment and shall be proposed and stamped by the 
Civil Defence approved House of Expertise. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 513 of 1348 

6.  Design, Installation, Inspection and Maintenance of 

Fire Detection and Alarm Systems 
 
6.1. 
 

Design/Specification and Submittals 

6.1.1.  Design, Specifications and Submittals to Civil Defence for approval shall be main 
consultants responsibility. Consultant shall have competent and knowledgeable 
personnel to understand the Civil Defence requirements and codes and standards. 

 
6.1.2.  Design submittals shall be complete with Fire Detection Design Objective, Manu-

facturer’s design Specifications, Battery calculations, Detector Spacing criteria, ap-
propriate selection of types of systems and their components, in compliance with 
this code. 

 
Installation 

6.2. 
 

6.2.1. 

 
6.2.2. 

 
6.2.3. 

 
6.2.4. 

 
6.2.5. 

Installation of Fire Detection and Alarm Systems shall be carried out only by Civil 
Defence approved and licensed contractors. General contractors, MEP Contractors, 
Electrical contractors, BMS Contractors, Home automation Contractors shall not be 
allowed to install Fire Detection and Alarm Systems. 

Installation contractor qualification and approval from Civil Defence is based on 
their training from respective system manufacturers, experience, understanding of 
codes and standards and workmanship. 

Installation contractors shall apply to Civil Defence and secure passing marks in 
Civil Defence examination to gain license and be qualified as “approved Fire Detec-
tion and Alarm Systems contractors”. 

Installation contractor shall not commence work on site without receiving Civil De-
fence stamped and approved drawings from the Consultant. 

It is contractors responsibility to adhere to consultant’s Civil Defence approved 
drawings and Manufacturer’s installation guidelines and specifications. 

 
Inspection and Acceptance 

Inspection and acceptance shall be main consultant’s responsibility. 

6.3.1. 
 
6.3.2.  Main consultant shall inspect contractor work during installations and ensure that 
all systems are installed, tested, commissioned and performing as per the Civil De-
fence approved drawings, manufacturer’s design and installation guidelines, ac-
ceptance criteria and their intended purpose. 

 
6.3.3. 

Consultant shall handover system inspection report, maintenance manuals to the 
owner. 

Inspection and Maintenance 

6.4.1. 

The building owner, his appointed representative and the facility management 
shall be responsible to ensure that all the Fire Detection and Alarm Systems in the 
facility are inspected regularly, maintained and repaired to serve their intended 
purpose during emergencies. 

6.3. 
 

 
6.4. 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 514 of 1348 

 
6.5. 
 

Fire Detection and Alarm System Acceptance Test 

6.5.1. 

 
6.5.2. 

The Fire Detection and Alarm System acceptance tests and criteria shall be as per 
Table 8.16. 

The acceptance tests required by Table 8.16. are minimum guideline. The com-
plete tests shall be as per Manufacturer’s guidelines, NFPA 70, and NFPA 72. 

Table 8.16.: Acceptance Tests for Fire Detection and Alarm System 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. DOCUMENTATION 

2.  ACCEPTANCE 

TESTS 

i.  Lead Consultant shall prepare pre-handover test reports, update drawings as 
per site conditions (prepare shop drawings), battery calculations, document 
all the manufacturer’s design, installation and maintenance guidelines. 

ii.  Prepare documentation for any performance based  design approach was 

adopted. 

iii. Emergency plans and sequence of operation, sequence of alarm signals, se-

quence matrix shall be documented to be handed over to the owner. 

1. RESPONSIBILITY 
 
i. 

Lead consultant shall carry out the following acceptance tests with Fire De-
tection and Alarm System contractors and other relevant contractors. 

 
2. POWER SUPPLY 
 
i. 
ii.  Batteries /UPS are of right rating and installed properly. 
iii.  Primary Mains disconnect switch location and switch number is mentioned 

Primary Power and Secondary Power is available and satisfactory. 

on drawing and inside FACP. 

FACP location is as per approved drawings. 
FACP controls are working, displays are satisfactory. 

 
3. FACP 
 
i. 
ii. 
iii.  LAMP test of the FACP is satisfactory. 
iv.  Remote annunciators are working and displays are satisfactory. 
 
4. VISUAL INSPECTION OF INITIATING DEVICES 
 
i. 
ii.  Detectors are free of obstructions. 
iii.  Detectors are at satisfactory distance from air diffusers, air movement are-

Detectors are installed as per approved locations and spacing. 

as. 

iv.  Manual call points are installed near exits satisfactorily. 
v.  Manual call points are installed at acceptable height. 
 
5. VISUAL INSPECTION OF NOTIFICATION DEVICES 
 
i.  Notification devices are installed at proper heights and location. 
ii.  Visible notifications are free of obstruction 
iii.  Alarm audibility and visibility is clear and understandable.  
iv.  Alarm notification is both in English and Arabic. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 515 of 1348 

Table 8.16.: Acceptance Tests for Fire Detection and Alarm System 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

2.  ACCEPTANCE 

TESTS 

6. OPERATIONAL/ FUNCTIONAL TESTS 
 
i.  Notify 24 X 7 and Civil Defence of the Functional tests. 
ii.  Disconnect any suppression systems monitored and triggered by the Fire 

Detection and Alarm System to be tested. 

Load voltage verification. 

Trouble signal normalization. 

Functional tests of FACP Lamps, LEDS and LCD. 
Fuses: Removal  and normalization. 

iii.  The following operational and functional tests shall be conducted. 
 
7. SECONDARY POWER 
 
i. 
ii.  Discharge test. 
iii.  Charger tests. 
 
8. FACP 
 
i. 
ii. 
iii.  Disconnect switches operation. 
iv.  Trouble signals initiation (open wire, loop, unlock detectors etc.) 
v. 
vi.  Ground fault monitoring. 
vii.  Annunciation to remote panels. 
 
9. INITIATING DEVICES 
 
i. 
ii. 
iii.  Trigger alarm through heat detectors by heat blower. 
iv.  Verify alarm signal generation. 
v.  Verify annunciator alarms and displays. 
vi.  Verify the location displays and confirm addresses of initiating device. 
vii.  Verify following interconnected systems upon alarm signal. 
 
10. INTERCONNECTED SYSTEMS 
 
i. 

Trigger alarm through smoke detectors using listed aerosol . 
Trigger alarm through operating manual  call points. 

Interconnected systems such as HVAC shut down, dampers, doors, elevators 
are functioning  satisfactorily. 
The interconnected systems are monitored and supervised. 

ii. 
iii.  Disconnect , initiate trouble signal and normalize.  
 
11. NOTIFICATION DEVICES 
 
i. 
ii.  Voice messages are clear and comprehendible.  
iii.  Visual notifications are satisfactory and convey the alarm. 
iv.  Verify supervision of notification devices. Initiate trouble and restore. 

Audibility is clear. And within the acceptable strength. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 516 of 1348 

Table 8.16.: Acceptance Tests for Fire Detection and Alarm System 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

3. HANDING OVER 

1. DOCUMENTS TO BE HANDED OVER TO OWNER BY CONSULTANT 
 
i. 

Consultant shall handover as built drawings, copy of civil defence approved 
and stamped drawings. 
System manufacturer’s design, installation, inspection and maintenance 
manual. 
Inspection report signed by Consultant, Contractors and Owner’s represent-
atives. 

ii. 

iii. 

iv.  Civil Defence NOC, completion certificates. 
 
2. SYSTEM SOFTWARE 
 
i. 

ii. 

For software-based systems, a copy of the site-specific software shall be pro-
vided to the system owner or owner’s designated representative.  
The site-specific software documentation shall include both the user 
passcode and either the system programming password or specific instruc-
tions on how to obtain the programming password from the system manu-
facturer. 

iii.  The passwords provided shall enable currently certified qualified program-
ming personnel to access, edit, modify, and add to the existing system site-
specific software. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 517 of 1348 

6.6. 
 

Inspection and Maintenance of Fire Detection and Alarm System 

6.6.1. 

 
6.6.2. 

The Inspection and Maintenance of Fire Detection and Alarm System shall be as 
per Table 8.17. 

The Inspection and Maintenance of Fire Detection and Alarm System required by 
Table 8.17. are minimum guidelines. The complete tests and maintenance shall be 
as per Manufacturer’s guidelines, NFPA 70, and NFPA 72. 

Table 8.17.: Inspection and Maintenance for Fire Detection and Alarm System 

ITEM 

1. DAILY 

2. WEEKLY 

REQUIREMENTS 

i.  Verify that FACP is free of troubles, faults and is working with normal power in 

satisfactory condition. 

ii.  Verify signal receiving to annunciators. 
iii. Take investigation and rectification action if there are fault signals or any abnor-

mal conditions and displays present on FACP. 

i.  Check fuses. 
ii.  Check primary power supply for normality. 
iii. Check interfaced systems and equipment 
iv. Perform Lamp test, LED, LCD Test. 
v.  Check for trouble signals. 
vi. Check for initiating devices LED blinking randomly. 
vii. Take investigation and rectification action if there are fault signals or any abnor-

mal conditions and displays present on FACP. 

3. MONTHLY 

i.  Inspect Lead-Acid batteries for electrolyte level. 
ii.  Perform walk-through tests from FACP to verify all devices are communicating 

with FACP satisfactorily. 

4. QUARTERLY  

i.  Verify that initiating devices are free from obstructions, dust, paint etc. verify ori-

5. SEMI                    

ANNUALLY 

(TWICE A 

YEAR)  

entation is intact. 

ii.  Verify water flow switches, water level indicators, LPG signals and Fire pump sig-

nals are satisfactorily monitored. 

i.  Verify FACP and annunciators functionality. 
ii.  Operate and verify releasing mechanisms without discharging suppression 

agents. 

iii. Verify fire suppression agent systems supervisory signals, switches. 
iv. Verify working condition of Notification devices. 
v.  Verify Visible notification devices functionality.  
vi. Perform all other tests required Daily, Monthly and Quarterly. 
vii. Take investigation and rectification action if there are fault signals or any abnor-

mal conditions, loss of signals and displays are present on FACP. 

6. ANNUALLY 

i.  Primary power supply shall be tested under maximum load with all devices in 

load, operating simultaneously. 

ii.  Disconnect all primary power supply and verify power backup and trouble signals 

from secondary power supplies. 

iii. Complete test of FACP and annunciators as per acceptance tests. 
iv. Initiate and trigger fire alarms on all initiating devices and verify alarm signals, 

supervisory signals and trouble signals as per acceptance tests. 

v.  Verify all notification devices functionality as per acceptance test. 
vi. Verify interconnected system supervision, releasing mechanisms as per ac-

ceptance test. 

vii. Take investigation and rectification action if there are fault signals or any abnor-

mal conditions and displays present on FACP. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 518 of 1348 

7.  Material Test Standards, Approval and registration. 

 
7.1.  Acceptable Test Standards and criteria 

 
7.1.1.  All the Devices, Controls, Wiring, Modules, Materials, Systems, Assemblies, equip-
ment, Products, Components and Accessories, referred to in this chapter with re-
spect to Life Safety, Fire Safety and Emergency Services shall be Listed, Approved 
and Registered by the Civil Defence Material Approval Department. 

 
7.1.2.  There is no year of edition mentioned against any test standards. It is the intent of 

Civil Defence to convey to the customers seeking laboratory tests and the test la-
boratories to follow the “LATEST EDITION OF THE TEST STANDARD, AS AND WHEN 
THEY ARE UPGRADED/REVISED/AMENDED, TO THE DATE” 

 
7.1.3.  Smoke Detectors 

i. 

FM3230, Approval standard for Smoke Actuated Detectors for automatic alarm 
signaling. 

ii.  UL 268, Standard for Smoke Detectors for Fire Alarm Systems. 
iii.  EN 54-7, Fire detection and fire alarm systems. Smoke detectors. Point detec-

tors using scattered light, transmitted light or ionization. 

iv.  EN 14604, Smoke alarm devices (Domestic) 
v. 

ISO7240-7, Fire detection and alarm systems -- Part 7: Point-type smoke detec-
tors using scattered light, transmitted light or ionization. 

vi.  EN 54-12, Smoke detectors - Line detectors using a transmitted optical beam 
vii. 

ISO 7240-12, Smoke detectors - Line detectors using a transmitted optical 
beam 

 

7.1.4.  Heat Detectors 

UL 521, Standard for Heat Detectors for Fire Protective Signaling Systems. 
FM 3210, Heat Detectors for Automatic Fire Alarm Signaling. 

i. 
ii. 
iii.  EN 54-5, Fire detection and fire alarm systems. Heat detectors. Point detectors 
iv. 
 

ISO 7240-5, Fire detection and alarm systems. Point-type heat detectors 

7.1.5.  Air Sampling Type Detectors 

i. 
ii. 

EN 54-20, Fire detection and fire alarm systems. Aspirating smoke detectors 
FM3230, Approval standard for Smoke Actuated Detectors for automatic alarm 

signaling 

7.1.6.  Flame Detectors 

i. 

FM 3260, Radiant Energy-Sensing Fire Detectors for Automatic Fire Alarm Sig-
naling. 
EN 54-10, Flame detectors - Point detectors 
ISO 7240-10 - Flame detectors - Point detectors 

ii. 
iii. 
iv.  BS ISO 19292, Ships and marine technology.  Lifesaving and fire protection.  

Point-type resettable flame detectors for ships 

 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 519 of 1348 
7.1.7.  Multi-Sensor Fire Detectors 

i. 

ii. 

ISO 7240-15, Point type fire detectors using scattered light, transmitted light or 
ionization sensors in combination with a heat sensor 
EN 54-29, Multi-sensor fire detectors - Point detectors using a combination of 
smoke and heat sensors 

iii.  EN 54-30, Multi-sensor fire detectors - Point detectors using a combination of 

carbon monoxide and heat sensors 

iv.  EN 54-31, Multi-sensor fire detectors - Point detectors using a combination of 

smoke, carbon monoxide and optionally heat sensors 

 

7.1.8.  Line Type Detectors 

i. 

BS EN 54-22:2015 - Fire detection and fire alarm systems.  Resettable line-type 
heat detectors. 

 
7.1.9.  Carbon Monoxide Detectors 

i. 

LPS 1265, Requirements and Testing Procedures for the LPCB Approval and 
Listing of Carbon Monoxide Fire Detectors Using Electrochemical Cells 
ISO 7240-6, Carbon monoxide fire detectors using electro-chemical cells 

ii. 
iii.  LPS 1274, Testing procedures for the LPCB approval and listing of carbon mon-

oxide / heat multisensor detectors using electrochemical cells 

iv.  LPS 1279, Testing procedures for the LPCB approval and listing of point multi-

sensor fire detectors using optical or ionization smoke sensors and electro-
chemical cell CO sensors and optically heat sensors  
EN 54-26 - Carbon monoxide detectors - Point detectors 

v. 
 

7.1.10.  Combustible Gases Detection  

BS EN 50194 Electrical apparatus for the detection of combustible gases in 
domestic premises. Test methods and performance requirements 

i. 

 

7.1.11.  Manual Call Points 

UL 38, Standard for Manual Signaling Boxes for Fire Alarm Systems. 
EN 54-11, Manual call points 
ISO 7240-11, Manual call points 

i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv.  FM-3010, Approval Standard for Fire Alarm Signaling Systems 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 520 of 1348 

7.1.12.  Duct Detectors 

i. 
ii. 

UL 268A, Standard for Smoke Detectors for Duct Application 
LPS 1280 Testing procedures for the LPCB approval and listing of duct 
smoke detectors using point smoke detectors. 

iii.  EN 54-27, Fire detection and alarm systems.  Duct smoke detectors  
iv.  FM3230, Approval standard for Smoke Actuated Detectors for automatic alarm 

signaling. 

 

7.1.13.  Video Image Smoke Detector 

UL 268 B, Outline of Investigation for Video Image Smoke Detectors. 
FM 3232, Video Image Fire Smoke Detectors for Automatic Fire Alarm Signal-
ing. 

i. 
ii. 

 

7.1.14.  Audible Notification Devices 

i. 

UL 464, Audible Signaling Devices for Fire Alarm and Signaling devices, includ-
ing accessories. 

ii.  UL 1480, Speakers for Fire Alarm and Signaling Systems, including Accessories. 
iii.  FM 3150, Audible Notification Appliances for Automatic Fire Alarm Signaling. 
iv.  EN 54-3, Sounders  

 

7.1.15.  Visible Notification Devices 

i. 

UL 1638, Visible Signaling Devices for Fire Alarm and Signaling Systems, includ-
ing accessories. 
EN 54-23, Fire alarm devices. Visual alarm devices 

ii. 
iii.  UL 1971, Standard for Signaling Devices for the Hearing Impaired  
 
 

7.1.16.  FACP (Fire Alarm Control Panel) Control Units 

UL 864, Standard for Control Units and Accessories for Fire Alarm Systems. 
FM 3010, Fire Alarm Signaling Systems 

i. 
ii. 
iii.  FM 3011, Central Station Service for Fire Alarms and Protective Equipment Su-

pervision. 

iv.  EN 54-2, Control and indicating equipment 
v. 
 

ISO 7240-2, Control and indicating equipment 

7.1.17.  Door Closers-Holders 

i. 

ii. 

UL 228, Standard for Door Closers-Holders, with or without integral smoked 
detectors.  
FM 4121, Fire and Smoke Door Holder and/or Release Devices. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 521 of 1348 

 

7.1.18.  Wireless, Radio linked Fire Detection and Alarm System 

i. 
ii. 

EN 54-25, Components using radio links 
LPS 1257, Requirements and Testing Procedures for Radio Linked Fire Detec-
tion and Fire Alarm Equipment. 

iii.  UL 985, Standard for Household Fire Warning System Units . 
 

7.1.19.  Line Isolators 

EN 54-17, Short circuit isolators 
EN 54-18, Input/output devices 

i. 
ii. 
 

7.1.20.  Input/Output Devices 

EN 54-18, Input/output devices 

i. 
 

7.1.21.  Compatibility Testing of Components 

EN 54-13, Compatibility assessment of system components 
LPS 1054, Requirements and testing procedures for the LPCB approval and 
listing of component compatibility for fire detection and alarm systems 

i. 
ii. 

 

7.1.22.  Power Supply Equipment 

EN 54-4, Power supply equipment 
ISO 7240-4, Power supply equipment 

i. 
ii. 
 

7.1.23.  Fire rated Cable, Certified for 120 minutes 

 i. 

EN 50200, Method of test for resistance to fire of unprotected small cables for 
use in emergency circuits 

ii.    UL  2196, Standard for Fire Test for Circuit Integrity of Fire-Resistive Power, 

Instrumentation, Control, and Data Cables  

iii.    BS 8434-2, Methods of test for assessment of the fire integrity of electric ca-
bles. Test for unprotected small cables for use in emergency circuits. BS EN 
50200 with a 930° flame and with water spray . 

iv.    BS 7629-1, Electric cables. Specification for 300/500 V fire resistant screened 

cables having low emission of smoke and corrosive gases when affected by fire. 
Multicore and multipair cables. 

v.    BS 6387, Test method for resistance to fire of cables required to maintain cir-

cuit integrity under fire conditions. 

vi.    IEC 60331-1, Tests for electric cables under fire conditions. 
vii.    IEC 60331-2, Tests for electric cables under fire conditions. 
viii.   IEC 60332-2-2, Tests on electric and optical fibre cables under fire conditions. 
ix.    IEC 60332-3-10, Tests on electric and optical fibre cables under fire conditions. 
x.     IEC 60331-2, Tests for electric cables under fire conditions. 
xi.    UL 1724, Outline of Investigation for Fire Tests for Electrical Circuit Protective 

Systems. 

xii.   UL 1685, Standard for Vertical-Tray Fire-Propagation and Smoke-Release Test 

for Electrical and Optical-Fiber Cables. 

xiii.   UL 1666, UL 1666 Test for Flame Propagation Height of Electrical and Optical-

Fiber Cables Installed Vertically in Shafts. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 522 of 1348Chapter 9 
FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 523 of 1348In this Chapter:

 Details of various fire protection systems.

 Application of fire protection systems.

 Design criteria for various hazards.

 Inspection and maintenance of fire systems.
 

Intent of the Chapter: 

• 

• 

• 

provide  protection  for  life  and  property  from  fire  through  fire  protection 
systems such as standpipes, hydrants, sprinkler systems and other types of fire 
suppression systems. 
To  ensure  properly  designed  fire  systems  and  adequate  quantity  of  water  is 
available for fire fighters. 
To ensure Fire systems are designed, installed, inspected and maintained as per 
international standards.. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 524 of 1348 

In this Chapter : 

Intent of the Chapter 

  Details of various Fire Protection 

Systems 

  Application of Fire Protection 

Systems 

  To provide protection for life and property from fire 

through Fire Protection Systems such as  Standpipes, 
Hydrants, Sprinkler systems and other types of fire 
suppression systems. 

  Design criteria for various hazards 

  To ensure properly designed Fire systems and adequate 

  Inspection and Maintenance of Fire 

Systems 

 

quantity of water is available for Fire Fighters. 

  To ensure Fire systems are designed, installed, 
Inspected and maintained as per international 
standards. 

1. Definitions 

 
1.1.  General 
 

1.1.1.  Shall  

 It is a mandatory requirement by Civil Defence. 
 

1.1.2.  Should 

 It is a recommendation by Civil Defence but it is not mandatory. 
 

1.1.3.  Listed 

Approved and registered by the individual Emirates’ Civil Defence material depart-
ment. 

 

1.1.4.  Bar (bar) 

Unit of measurement for pressure. Though it is not a SI unit, it is a common practice 
to use this unit of measurement in fire protection. 
1 Bar = 14.5 psi. 
1 psi = 0.0689 bar. 

 
1.1.5.  US Gallons (Gal.) 

Unit of measurement for volume. Though it is not a SI unit, it is a common practice 
to use this unit of measurement for water volume in fire protection. 
1 Gal. = 3.785 L (Liters) 
1 L = 0.264 Gal. 
1 Cubic Meter = 1000 L 
1 Cubic Meter = 264.17 Gal. 

       
1.1.6.  GPM (Gallons per minute) 

Unit of measurement for flow. Though it is not a SI unit, it is widely a practice to use 
this unit of measurement for water flow per square feet in fire protection. 
1 GPM (gpm/minute) = 3.78 Liter/minute  (LPM) 
 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 525 of 1348 

1.1.  General 
 

1.1.7.   Breeching inlet 
 

A connection through which the Civil Defence fire department can pump supple-
mental water into the sprinkler system, standpipe, or other system, furnishing wa-
ter for fire extinguishment or to supplement existing water supplies. 

 
1.1.8.  Fire Vehicle (Fire Fighting Apparatus)  
 

Fire Vehicle or Fire Fighting Apparatus is designed for fire fighters and is used by 
Civil Defence trained fire fighters to carry water and equipment to fight fires. The-
se Vehicles are equipped with Water, pumps, extinguishing agents, extinguishers, 
Rescue and smoke venting tools and equipment. Please see Chapter 2, section 4. 

 

1.1.9.  Fire Suppression  
 

Sharply reducing the heat release rate of a fire and preventing its regrowth by 
means of direct and sufficient application of extinguishing agents such as water or 
gas or chemicals through the fire plume to the burning fuel surface. 

1.1.10.  Water based Fire Protection Systems  
 

Water is the most widely used and available fire-extinguishing agent. Water is 
effective in fire suppression. The techniques and mechanisms using water and its 
heat absorbing, cooling and fire extinguishing properties to fight and extinguish 
fires are Water Based Fire Protection Systems such as Standpipe System, Auto-
matic Sprinkler Systems, Water Spray Systems, Water Mist Systems, Fire Hydrant 
Systems, and Foam Systems etc. 

1.1.11.  Gas and Chemical based Fire Suppression Systems  
 

Gas extinguishing technology is based mainly on the principle of removing oxygen. 
By introducing a gaseous extinguishing agent into the room's atmosphere the oxy-
gen content is reduced to the point where the combustion process is halted. The 
gas extinguishing process uses either inert or chemical gases. This technique and 
mechanism using various gases and chemicals such as Clean Agents, CO2, Dry 
Chemical and Wet Chemical agents and their fire extinguishing properties to fight 
and extinguish fires are called Gas and Chemical based Fire Protection Systems. 

1.1.12.  High-Challenge Fire Hazard 
 

A fire hazard typical of that produced by fires in combustible high-piled storage. 

1.1.13.  Hazard Classification for Sprinkler Protection  
 

1.1.13.1. Light Hazard 

The areas and occupancies which and contain low quantity and low com-
bustible materials which are expected to release low heat release rates 
during fire condition shall be classified as light hazard occupancies. Occu-
pancies considered as light hazard may include 
 
a.  Assembly, Group C  
(Art galleries, Community halls, Mosques, Churches, Temples, Court-
rooms, Funeral parlors, Gymnasiums, Fitness Centers, Seminar halls, Li-
braries, Museums, Open air Theaters, Amphitheaters, Parks, Beaches) 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 526 of 1348 

 

b. Assembly, Group B  
(Amusement  Parks, Grandstands, Stadiums, Bleachers, Swimming Pools, 
Skating Rinks, Indoor Kid’s Play Areas, Bowling alleys, Pool/billiard par-
lors, Waiting areas in transportation terminals, Airport Terminal Build-
ings, Restaurant seating areas, Food courts seating areas) 
 
c. Educational, Group A  
(Nurseries, Kindergartens, Preschool center, Talent Grooming centers for 
kids) 
 
d. Educational, Group B  
(Schools for up to 12th grade students) 
 
e. Educational, Group C  
(Colleges, Universities, Training centers for adults) 
 
f. Healthcare, Group B  
(Clinics) 
 
g. Healthcare, Group C  
(Ambulatory healthcare centers) 
 
h. Residential, Group A  
(Residential buildings, Apartments, assisted Living homes) 
 
i. Residential, Group B  
(Staff accommodation, Hostels, Monasteries, School boarding house) 
 
j. Residential, Group C  
(Labor accommodation) 
 
k. Daycare, Group A  
(Child day care, old age day care) 
 
l. Daycare, Group B  
(Adult day care) 
 
m. Detention and Correctional, Group A  
(Adult Prisons, Adult Detention centers, Adult Jails, Adult Correctional 
centers, Adult Pre-release centers) 
 
n. Detention and Correctional, Group B  
(Juvenile Prisons, Juvenile Detention centers, Juvenile Correctional cen-
ters) 
 
o. Detention and Correctional, Group C  
(Medical quarantines, Airport quarantines) 
 
p. Industrial, Group C  
(Beverages (non-alcoholic), Brick and masonry, Gypsum, Ice , Metal 
products (fabrication and assembly), Telecommunications signal pro-
cessing, Telephone exchanges, GSM Switching Stations) 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 527 of 1348 

 

q. Animal Housing, Group A  
(Animal Market, Pet Shops, Bird Market, Veterinary Clinic) 
 
r. Animal Housing, Group C  
(Zoo) 

 
 
1.1.13.2. Ordinary Hazard, Group 1 

The areas and occupancies which contains medium quantity and moder-
ate combustible materials and the storages up to 2.4 meters which are 
expected to release moderate heat release rates during fire condition 
shall be classified as Ordinary Hazard group-1. Occupancies considered 
as ordinary hazard are: 
 
a. Assembly, Group A  
(Banquet halls, Night clubs, Discos, Restaurants  with more than 50 peo-
ple, Pubs, Bars, Theaters, Concert Halls, Cinemas, Indoor Stadiums, Stu-
dios with audience, Exhibition halls, Casinos) 
 
b. Hotel, Group A  
(Hotels, Hotel apartments, time share properties) 
 
c. Hotel, Group B  
(Dormitories, Motels, Lodging) 
 
d. Hotel, Group C  
(Resorts) 
 
e. Mercantile, Group A  
(Hardware Stores, Paint Stores, Chemical Stores, Furniture Stores, Motor 
Vehicle Showrooms, Restaurants) 
 
f. Mercantile, Group B  
(Department Stores, Supermarkets, Hypermarkets, Shopping Centers, 
Anchor stores, Showrooms, Retail stores, Whole sale stores, Boutiques, 
Drugstores, Gift Shops) 
 
g. Storage, Group C  
(Frozen Food, Asbestos, Glass or ceramic, Cement in bags, Chalk and 
crayons, Dairy products in nonwaxed coated paper containers, Dry cell 
batteries, Electrical coils, Electrical motors, Empty cans, Foods in non-
combustible containers, Fresh fruits and vegetables in nonplastic trays or 
containers, Frozen foods, Glass bottles, empty or filled with noncombus-
tible liquids, Gypsum board, Inert pigments, Ivory, Meats, Metal cabi-
nets, Metal desks with plastic tops and trim Metal parts, Metals, Mirrors, 
Oil-filled and other types of distribution transformers, Parking garages, 
open or enclosed, Porcelain and pottery, Stoves, Talc and soapstones, 
Washers and dryer) 
 
 
 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 528 of 1348h. Industrial, Group B  
(Appliances, Athletic equipment, Automobiles, Bakeries, Beverages 
(alcoholic), Bicycles, Boat building, Brooms or brushes, Business ma-
chines, Cameras and photo equipment, Cold Storage, Canvas or similar 
fabric, Carpets and rugs, Clothing, Construction, Disinfectants, Dry-
cleaning /dyeing, Electric light plants and power houses, Substations, 
Electronics, Engines, Food processing,) 
 

1.1.13.3. Ordinary Hazard, Group 2 

The areas and occupancies which are used for commercial & industrial 
uses and contain medium quantity and moderate to high combustible 
materials and the storages up to 3.6 meters which are expected to re-
lease moderate heat release rates and the storages up to 2.4 meters 
which are high heat release rates during fire condition shall be classified 
as Ordinary Hazard group-2, such as 
 
a. Animal Housing, Group B  
(Stable, Animal sheds, Livestock Shelter, Slaughter Houses) 
 
b. Malls, Group A 
(Covered Malls) 
 
c. Industrial, Group B 
(Paper and pulp mill, Paper process plants, Piers and wharves, Plastics 
fabrication, including blow molding, extruding, and machining; excluding 
operations using combustible, hydraulic fluids, Post offices, Printing and 
publishing, Racetrack stable/kennel areas, including those stable/kennel 
areas, barns, and associated buildings at state, county, and local fair-
grounds, Repair garages, Resin application area, Stages, Textile manufac-
turing, Tire manufacturing, Tobacco products manufacturing, Wood ma-
chining, Wood product assembly).  
 

1.1.13.4. Extra Hazard, Group 1 

The areas and occupancies which are used for industrial uses and con-
tains high quantity and very high combustible materials which will sup-
port fast development of fire and are expected to release very high heat 
release rates during fire condition and having less or no combustible or 
flammable liquids & gases shall be classified as Extra high hazard     
group 1. Occupancies with high hazard, Group 1 are: 
 
a. Storage/Industrial, Group B  
(Storage and activities involving Aircraft hangar, Bags: cloth/burlap/
paper, Bamboos and rattan, Baskets, Belting: canvas/leather, Books and 
paper in rolls or packs, Boots and shoes, Buttons, Cardboard , its boxes, 
Clothing, woolen wearing apparel, Cordage, Dry boat storage (indoor), 
Furniture, Furs, Glues, mucilage, pastes, Grains, Horns and combs, other 
than celluloid, Leather, Linoleum, Lumber, Motor vehicle repair garages, 
Photo engravings, Resilient flooring, Silks, Soaps, Sugar, Tobacco, cigars, 
cigarettes and snuff etc.  

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 529 of 1348 

1.1.  General 

Upholstery and mattresses, Wax candles, Combustible hydraulic fluid 
use areas, Die casting, Metal extruding, Plywood and particleboard man-
ufacturing, Printing *using inks having flash points below 100°F, (38°C)+, 
Rubber reclaiming, compounding, drying, milling, vulcanizing, Saw mills, 
Textile picking, opening, blending, garnetting, or carding, combining of 
cotton, synthetics, wool shoddy, or burlap Upholstering with plastic 
foams) 
 

1.1.13.5. Extra Hazard, Group 2 

The areas and occupancies which are used for industrial uses and con-
tain moderate to high quantity of flammable & combustible liquids and 
gases which will support rapid growth of fire and expected to release 
very high heat release rates during fire condition shall be classified as 
Extra High Hazard group 2.    
 
a. Storage/Industrial, Group A 
(Storage and activities involving Explosives, Detonators, Pyrophoric ma-
terial, Unstable (Reactive) material, Organic Peroxide, Oxidizer, Fire 
Works, Aerosols Level 1,2,3, Combustible Liquid Class I, II, III, Combus-
tible Fiber, Combustible Dust, Pyrotechnic Material, Cryogenics, Flamma-
ble, Oxidizing, Flammable Gas, Flammable Liquid, IA, IB, IC, Flammable 
Solid, Oxidizing Gas, Water Reactive Material, Perfumes, Baled Cotton, 
Corrosive Material, Toxic Material, Plastic products, Tires, Asphalt satu-
rating, Flammable liquids spraying, Flow coating, Manufactured home or 
modular building assemblies, where finished enclosure is present and 
has combustible interiors), Open oil quenching, Plastics manufacturing, 
Solvent cleaning, Varnish and paint dipping etc.) 
 
b. Parking, Group B 
(Robotic, Mechanical parking) 
 

1.1.13.6. Commodity Class –I 

Class I commodity are the noncombustible materials that are                                 
a. stored directly on wooden pallets                                                                                 
b.  single layer corrugated cartons with or with out pallets                                        
c.  Or shrink wrapped or paper wrapped as unit load with or without pal-
lets. See Table 9.2. 
 

1.1.13.7. Commodity Class-II 

Class II commodity are the noncombustible materials that are stored in 
slatted wooden crates, solid wood boxes, multiple-layered corrugated 
cartons, or other similar combustible packaging material, with or with-
out pallets. See Table 9.2. 
 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 530 of 1348 

1.1.13.8. Commodity Class-III  

Class III commodity are the materials manufactured from wood, paper, 
natural fibers or Group C plastics with or without cartons, boxes or 
crates and with or without pallets. The materials that contain 5% by vol-
ume or by weight of group C plastics products may also be considered as 
class 3 commodities. See Table 9.2. 

 
1.1.  General 
 

1.1.13.9. Commodity Class-IV 

Class IV commodity are the materials manufactured from group B plas-
tics-tics or from free flowing group A plastics or contain within itself or 
its packing 5 – 15 % by weight or by volume of group A plastics. See Ta-
ble 9.2. 
 

1.1.13.10. Group –A Plastics  

Examples of Group A plastic materials are ABS (acrylonitrile-butadiene-
styrene copolymer), Acetyl (polyformaldehyde), Acrylic (polymethyl 
methacrylate), Butyl rubber, EPDM (ethylene-propylene rubber), FRP 
(fiberglass-reinforced polyester), Natural rubber (if expanded), Nitrile-
rubber (acrylonitrile-butadiene-rubber), PET (thermoplastic polyester), 
Polybutadiene, Polycarbonate, Polyester elastomer, Polyethylene, Poly-
propylene, Polystyrene, Polyurethane, PVC (polyvinyl chloride — highly 
plasticized, with plasticizer content greater than 20 percent) (rarely 
found), SAN (styrene acrylonitrile) and SBR (styrene-butadiene rubber). 
See Table 9.2. 
 

1.1.13.11. Group –B Plastics 

Examples of Group B plastic materials are Cellulosics (cellulose acetate, 
cellulose acetate butyrate, ethyl cellulose), Chloroprene rubber, Fluoro-
plastics (ECTFE — ethylene-chlorotrifluoro-ethylene copolymer; ETFE — 
ethylene-tetrafluoroethylene-copolymer; FEP — fluorinated ethylene-
propylene copolymer), Natural rubber (not expanded), Nylon (nylon 6, 
nylon 6/6) and Silicone rubber. 

 

1.1.13.12. Group –C Plastics 

Examples of Group C plastic materials are Fluoroplastics (PCTFE — poly-
chlorotrifluoroethylene; PTFE — polytetrafluoroethylene), Melamine 
(melamine formaldehyde), Phenolic, PVC (polyvinyl chloride — flexible 
— PVCs with plasticizer content up to 20 percent), PVDC (polyvinylidene 
chloride), PVDF (polyvinylidene fluoride), PVF (polyvinyl fluoride) and 
Urea (urea formaldehyde). 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 531 of 1348 

1.1.  General 
 

1.1.13.13. Rolled paper Store 

A rolled paper storage facility can be further subdivided in to four clas-
ses based on its weight to determine the sprinkler system design crite-
ria. 
 
1.1.13.13.1. Heavy weight Class  

Heavyweight class shall include paperboard and paper 
stock having a basis weight per 92.9 m² of 9.1 kg. 

 

1.1.13.13.2. Medium weight Class 

Medium weight class shall include all the broad range of 
papers having a basis weight per 92.9 m2 of 4.5 kg to 9.1 
kg. 

 

1.1.13.13.3. Lightweight class 

Light weight class shall include all papers having a basis 
weight per 92.9 m² of 4.5 kg.   

 

1.1.13.13.4. Tissue  

Shall include the broad range of papers of characteristic 
gauzy texture, which, in some cases, are fairly transpar-
ent such as crepe wadding and the sanitary class includ-
ing facial tissue, paper napkins, bathroom tissue, and 
toweling. 
 

1.1.14.  Combustible Liquid 
 

A liquid that has a closed-cup flash point at or above 37.8°C (100°F). 

1.1.15.  Combustible Liquid Class II 
 

Any liquid that has a flash point at or above 37.8°C (100°F) and below 60°C (140°F). 

1.1.16.  Combustible Liquid Class III A 
 

Any liquid that has a flash point at or above 60°C (140°F), but below 93°C (200°F). 

1.1.17.  Combustible Liquid Class III B 
 

Any liquid that has a flash point at or above 93°C (200°F). 

1.1.18.  Flammable Liquid 
 

A liquid that has a closed-cup flash point that is below 37.8°C (100°F) and a maxi-
mum vapor pressure of 2068 mm Hg (40 psia) at 37.8°C (100°F). 

1.1.19.  Flammable Liquid Class I 
 

Any liquid that has a closed-cup flash point below 37.8°C (100°F). 

1.1.20.  Flammable Liquid Class I A 
 

Any liquid that has a flash point below 22.8°C (73°F) and a boiling point below 
37.8°C (100°F). 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 532 of 1348 

1.1.  General 

 
1.1.21.  Flammable Liquid Class I B 
 

Any liquid that has a flash point below 22.8°C (73°F) and a boiling point at or above 
37.8°C (100°F). 

1.1.22.  Flammable Liquid Class I C 
 

Any liquid that has a flash point at or above 22.8°C (73°F) but below 37.8°C (100°F). 

1.1.23.  Light or Low Hazard Storage Material List 
 

The Light or Low hazard materials for sprinkler protection criteria shall be as per 
Table 9.1.A. 

Table 9.1A.: Light / Low Hazard Material List 

CATEGORY 

LIST OF MATERIALS 

1.  FOOD AND    

BEVERAGE 

 
IN LESS THAN 5 
GAL. CAPACITY 
CONTAINERS 

2. METAL 

3. ELECTRICAL 

 

i.  Alcoholic beverages – up to 12% alcohol in metal, glass or ceramic material.  
ii.  Canned food – In cartons.  
iii.  Coffee – canned in carton.  
iv.  Fish products – frozen, non-waxed, non plastic packaging, canned, carton.  
v.  Frozen food – non-waxed, non-plastic packaging.  
vi.  Fruit – fresh, non-plastic trays or containers with wood spacers.  
vii.  Ice-cream.  
viii. Meat products – canned, carton, frozen, non-waxed, non-plastic containers.  
ix.  Milk and dairy products– waxed or non-waxed paper and plastic containers.  
x.  Nuts – canned, carton.  
xi.  Poultry product- canned, carton, frozen, non-waxed, non-plastic containers.  
xii.  Salt – bagged.  
xiii. Syrup – drummed metal containers.  

i.  Cans – empty metal.  
ii.  File cabinets – metal, wrap by cardboard.  
iii.  Metal desk – with plastic tops and trim.  
iv.  Metal doors and windows 
v.  Metal furniture 
vi.  Metal s., structural steel, cast iron 
vii.  Empty cargo containers 
viii. Precision dies 
ix.  Empty cylinders 
x.  Metal wires 
xi.  Scrap metal 

i.  Batteries – Dry cells, non-lithium, in cartons, filled automobile batteries.  
ii.  Electric coil  
iii.  Motor – electric  
iv.  Transformer (Non-energized) – dry   
v.  Wire – bare wire on metal spools, on wood skids.  
vi.  Computer 
vii.  Cookers, electric stoves 
viii. Water heaters 
ix.  Air condition, refrigeration spare parts 
x.  Antennas 
xi.  Telephone and telecommunication equipment  
xii.  Global positioning systems 
xiii. Type writers, photocopy machines 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 533 of 1348 

1.1.  General 

 
 

Table 9.1A.: Light / Low Hazard Material List 

CATEGORY 

LIST OF MATERIALS 

4. CONSTRUCTION 

5. AGRICULTURAL 

i.  Cement – in bags.  
ii.  Ready Mix concrete 
iii.  Paint – water based, carton.  
iv.  Cement blocks, Bricks and Masonry  
v.  Building hardware 
vi.  Tiles, Flooring 
vii.  Sand, Gravel and Stones 
viii. Sanitary ware 
ix.  Tanks and Silos 
x. 
xi.  Pipes and Fittings 
xii.  Scaffolding 
xiii. Marble  

Ironmongery 

i.  Seeds, Flowers, Plants 
ii.  Plant Nurseries 
iii.  Agricultural Tools, Equipment 
iv.  Garden Tools and Equipment 
v. 

Irrigation Tools and Equipment 

6. MISCELLANEOUS 

i.  Appliances like stove, refrigerator – not packaged, no exterior plastic materi-

al.  

ii.  Bottles, Jars – Empty glass, filled with noncombustible liquids or non-

combustible powders.  

iii.  Chalk and crayons.  
iv.  Fertilizers – Bagged, phosphates.  
v.  Glass and mirrors.  
vi.  Porcelain and pottery.  
vii.  Stables, Sheds  
viii. Washers and Driers  
ix.  Occupational Safety Equipment, hygiene. 
x.  Watches and clocks 
xi.  Laboratory equipment 
xii.  Medical equipment 
xiii. Solar energy equipment 
xiv. Diving equipment 
xv.  Loading, handling equipment 
xvi. Laundry equipment 
xvii.Industrial equipment and tools 
xviii.Jewelry trading 
xix. Pearls and precious stones 
xx.  Automobile spare parts 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 534 of 1348 

1.1.  General 

 
1.1.24.  Light or Low Hazard Industrial Activity List 
 

The Light or Low hazard activity list for sprinkler protection criteria shall be as per 
Table 9.1.B. 

 

Table 9.1.B: Light / Low Hazard Activity List 

CATEGORY 

LIST OF MATERIALS 

1. FOOD AND    

BEVERAGE 

i.  Non alcoholic beverage—bottling and production. 
ii. 

 Ice—Production 

2. METAL 

i.  Metal products (fabrication and assembly)  

3. ELECTRICAL 

4. CONSTRUCTION 

5. MISCELLANEOUS 

i.  Telecommunications signal processing  
ii.  GSM Switching stations 
iii.  Telephone exchanges  
iv.  Repair shops 
v.  Workshops without wood work, welding, cutting 

i.  Cement blocks, Bricks and Masonry—Production 
ii.  Ready mix concrete production 
iii.  Foundries  
iv.  Quarries  

i.  Ceramic, Porcelain and Pottery—Production 
ii.  Glass products—Production 
iii.  Mirror works 
iv.  Automobile workshops 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 535 of 1348 

1.1.25.  Identification of Classes of Materials (Commodity Classes) 
 

The identification of classes of materials for sprinkler design consideration shall be 
as per Table 9.2. (NFPA Table A.5.6.3.), in alphabetical order. 

Table 9.2: Classes of Materials/ Commodity 

PRODUCT           
CATEGORY 

PRODUCTS 

1. BATTERIES  

i.  Dry cells (excludes lithium, lithium-ion, and other simi-
lar exotic metals or combustible electrolyte); without 
blister packing (if blister packed refer to commodity 
classification definitions)  

ii.  Vehicle; any size (e.g., automobile or truck); Empty plas-

tic casing. 

iii.  Nonexpanded Vehicle; large (e.g., truck or larger); dry 
or wet (excludes lithium-ion and other cells containing 
combustible electrolyte) cells. 

iv.  Vehicle; small (e.g., automobile); wet (excludes lithium-
ion and other cells containing combustible electrolyte) 
cells 

COMMODITY 
CLASS 

Class I 
 
 
 
Group A  Nonexpanded 
 
Group A  Nonexpanded 
 
 
Class I 

2. EMPTY       

CONTAINERS  

i.  Noncombustible 
ii.  PET, bottles or jars   
iii.  Wood; solid sided (e.g., crates, boxes) 
iv.  Rigid plastic (not including PET), up to 32 oz. (1 L)  
 

Class I 
Class IV 
Class II 
Group A  Expanded 

3. FILM ROLLS,                          

i.  Film (polypropylene, polyester, polyethylene); rolled on 

PHOTO-
GRAPHIC 
ROLLS 

any reel type. 

ii.  Film; 35 mm metal film cartridges in polyethylene cans; 

cartoned. 

iii.  Film; motion picture or bulk rolls in polycarbonate, pol-
yethylene or in  metal cans; polyethylene bagged; car-
toned. 

iv.  Film; rolls in polycarbonate plastic cassettes; cartooned. 
v.  Photographic paper; sheets; bagged in polyethylene; 

cartoned 

Class II 
 
Class III 
 
Class II 
 
 
Class IV 
Class III 

4. FLAMMABLE /       

COMBUS-
TIBLE                
LIQUIDS 

 

i.  Aerosol; Level  
ii.  Lighters; butane; blister-packed; cartoned. 
iii.  Liquids; up to 20 percent alcohol (e.g., alcoholic bever-

ages, flavoring extracts); greater than 5 gallon (20 L) 
plastic containers with wall thickness greater than 1⁄4 in. 
(6 mm)  

iv.  Liquids; up to 20 percent alcohol (e.g., alcoholic bever-

ages, flavoring extracts); metal, glass or ceramic con-
tainers. 

v.  Liquids; up to 20 percent alcohol (e.g., alcoholic bever-
ages, flavoring extracts); wood, plastic containers great-
er than 5 gallons (20 L) and wall thickness up to 1⁄4 in. (6 
mm) 

vi.  Liquids; up to 20 percent alcohol (e.g., alcoholic bever-

ages, flavoring extracts); up to 5 gallons (20 L) plastic 
bottles or jars. 

Class III 
Group A  Nonexpanded 
Group A  Nonexpanded 
 
 
 
Class I 
 
 
Class II 
 
 
 
Class I 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 536 of 1348 

 
 

PRODUCT           
CATEGORY 

5. FOOD PRODUCTS 

—FROZEN   

Table 9.2: Classes of Materials/ Commodity 

PRODUCTS 

COMMODITY 
CLASS 

i.  Frozen foods; nonwaxed or nonplastic packaging. 
ii.  Frozen foods; plastic trays. 
iii.  Frozen foods; waxed or plastic-coated paper pack-

Class I 
Class III 
Class II 

aging 

6. FOOD PRODUCTS 
—NON FROZEN   

i.  Butter (stick or whipped spread) or margarine (up 

to 50 percent oil)  

ii.  Dry foods (such as baked goods, candy, cereals, 

cheese, chocolate, cocoa, coffee, grains, granular 
sugar, nuts, etc.); bagged or Cartoned  

iii.  Foods (e.g., coffee, fish products, fruit, meat prod-

ucts, nuts, poultry, etc.); metal cans  

iv.  Fruits and vegetables (noncombustible semi-

liquids); crushed; plastic containers up to 5 gallons 
(20 L)  

v.  Fruits and vegetables; fresh; wood spacers, non-

plastic trays or containers 

vi.  Margarine; over 50 and up to 80 percent oil  
vii.  Meat; fresh; no plastic packaging; uncartoned  
viii. Meat; fresh; no plastic packaging; cartoned  
ix.  Meat; fresh; plastic trays  
x.  Milk; any container; stored in solid plastic crates 
xi.  Milk; paper containers, or plastic bottles or jars up 

to 5 gallons (20 L) plastic bottles or jars.  

xii.  Salt; bagged 
xiii. Salt; cartoned  
xiv. Snack foods (e.g., potato chips); plasticized alumi-

num bags; cartoned  

xv. Syrup; wooden container  

7. FURNITURE AND 

BEDDING 

i.  Furniture and bedding; with foam cushioning  
ii.  Furniture; metal (e.g., file cabinets or desks with 

plastic trim); cartoned  

iii.  Furniture; wood (e.g., doors, windows, cabinets, 

etc.); no plastic coverings or foam cushioning  

iv.  Furniture; wood; plastic coverings nonexpanded 

plastic trim  

v.  Box spring; standard (minimal plastic materials)  
vi.  Box spring; wrapped in plastic cover  
vii. Mattress; foam (in finished form)  

Class III 
 
Class III 
 
 
Class I 
 
Class I 
 
 
Class I 
 
Group A  Nonexpanded 
Class I 
Class II 
Class III 
Group A  Nonexpanded 
Class I 
 
Class I 
Class II 
Group A Nonexpanded 
 
Class II 

Group A Expanded 
Class I 
 
Class III 
 
Class IV 
 
Class III 
Class IV 
Group A Expanded 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 537 of 1348 

 
 

Table 9.2: Classes of Materials/ Commodity 

PRODUCT           
CATEGORY 

PRODUCTS 

8. HOUSING       
MATERIALS/  
APPLIANCES 

i.  Appliances; major (e.g., stoves, refrigerators); no 

appreciable plastic interior or exterior trim; car-
tooned. 

ii.  Appliances; major (e.g., stoves, refrigerators); no 
appreciable plastic interior or exterior trim; uncar-
toned Appliances; no appreciable plastic exterior 
trim (interior of unit can have appreciable plastic). 

iii.  Carpet tiles; cartoned  
iv.  Fiberglass insulation; paper-backed rolls; bagged or 

unbagged  

v.  Floor coverings; vinyl, stacked tiles 
vi.  Floor coverings; vinyl; rolled  
vii.  Gypsum board  
viii. Housing materials (such as sinks, countertops, etc.); 

noncombustible, cartoned or crated  

ix.  Paint; oil-based; friction-top metal containers; car-

tooned  

x.  Paint; water-based (latex); friction-top metal con-

tainers; cartoned  

xi.  Roofing shingles; asphalt-coated fiberglass  
xii. Roofing shingles; asphalt-impregnated felt  

9. MISCELLANEOUS 

i.  Ammunition; small arms and shotgun; cartoned  
ii.  Charcoal; mineral spirit impregnated; bagged  
iii.  Charcoal; standard (non-mineral spirit impregnated); 

bagged  

iv.  Leather hides; baled Class II Leather; finished prod-

ucts (e.g., shoes, jackets, gloves, bags, luggage, belts)  

v.  Motors; electric  
vi.  Shock absorbers; metal dust cover  
vii.  Shock absorbers; plastic dust cover  
viii. Skis; composite materials (plastic, fiberglass, foam, 

etc.)  

ix.  Tobacco products; cartoned  
x.  Toys; stuffed; foam or synthetic  
xi.  Transformer; dry or empty (i.e., void of oil)-filled  
xii. Automobile spare parts, Automobile workshop 

COMMODITY 
CLASS 

Class II 
 
 
Class III 
 
 
 
Group A Nonexpanded 
Class IV 
 
Class IV 
Group A Nonexpanded 
Class I 
Class II 
 
Class IV 
 
Class I 
 
Class III 
Class IV 

Class IV 
Group A Expanded  
Class III 
 
Class III 
 
Class I 
Class II 
Class III 
Class IV 
 
Class III 
Group A Expanded  
Class I 
Class II 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 538 of 1348 

 
 

PRODUCT           
CATEGORY 

10. NONCOMBUS-
TIBLE   LIQUIDS  

Table 9.2: Classes of Materials/ Commodity 

PRODUCTS 

i.  Liquids or semi-liquids; PET containers greater than 

5 gallons (20 L) having a nominal wall thickness 
greater than 0.25 in (6 mm) 

ii.  Liquids or semi-liquids; PET containers up to 5 gal-
lons (20 L) or greater than 5 gallons (20 L) having a 
nominal wall thickness up to 0.25 in (6 mm)  

iii.  Liquids or semi-liquids (e.g., crushed fruits and veg-
etables); plastic containers up to 5 gallons (18.9 L) 
Capacity. 

iv.  Liquids or semi-liquids; plastic (except PET) contain-

ers greater than 5 gallons (20 L) capacity having a 
nominal wall thickness greater than 0.25 in. (6 mm)  
v.  Liquids or semi-liquids; plastic (except PET) contain-

ers greater than 5 gallons (20 L) capacity having a 
nominal wall thickness up to 0.25 in. (6 mm) 

vi.  Liquids; cardboard drink boxes, plastic-coated, wax-
coated, and/or aluminum-lined; uncartoned or on 
corrugated carton trays with plastic sheeting. 

vii.  Liquids; cardboard drink boxes, plastic-coated, wax-

coated, and/or aluminum-lined; stored in plastic 
containers  

viii. Liquids; glass bottles or jars; cartoned  
ix.  Liquids; pharmaceuticals (nonflammable); glass 

bottles or jars; cartoned. 

x.  Liquids; plastic bottles or jars; stored in open or sol-

id plastic crates  

11. PAPER        
PRODUCTS 

i.  Paper Products Book signatures (paper part of book 

without hard cover)  

ii.  Cartons (i.e., cardboard flats); corrugated; partially 

assembled. 

iii.  Cartons (i.e., cardboard flats); corrugated; unassem-

bled in neat piles. 

iv.  Cartons; wax-coated, single-walled corrugated  
v.  Cellulosic paper products; nonwax-coated (e.g., 

books, cardboard games, cartoned tissue products, 
magazines, newspapers, paper cups, paper plates, 
paper towels, plastic-coated paper food containers, 
stationery)  

vi.  Cellulosic paper products; wax-coated (e.g., paper 

plates, cups); loosely packed; cartoned. 

vii.  Cellulosic paper products; wax-coated (e.g., paper 

plates, cups); nested; cartoned  
viii. Matches; paper-type; cartoned  
ix.  Matches; wooden; cartoned  
x.  Rolled; lightweight; in storage racks  
xi.  Rolled; medium or heavyweight; in storage racks or 

on-side  

xii.  Tissue products; plastic-wrapped; cartoned  
xiii. Tissue products; plastic-wrapped; uncartoned  

 

COMMODITY 
CLASS 

Class IV  
 
 
Class  I 
 
 
Class I 
 
 
Group A Nonexpanded 
 
 
Class II 
 
 
Class I 
 
 
Group A Nonexpanded 
 
 
Class I 
Class II 
 
Group A Nonexpanded 

Class II 
 
Class IV 
 
Class III 
 
Group A Nonexpanded 
Class III 
 
 
 
 
Group A Nonexpanded 
 
Class IV 
 
Class IV 
Group A Nonexpanded 
Class IV 
Class III 
 
Class III 
Group A Nonexpanded 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 539 of 1348 

 
 

Table 9.2: Classes of Materials/ Commodity 

PRODUCT           
CATEGORY 

PRODUCTS 

12. PLASTIC /      

RUBBER 

 

i.  ABS (Acrylonitrile-butadienestyrene copolymer)  
ii.  Acetyl (polyformaldehyde)  
iii.  Acrylic (polymethyl methacrylate)  
iv.  Automobile bumpers and dashboards  
v.  Butyl rubber Cellulose Acetate Class IV 
vi.  Cellulose Acetate Butyrate  
vii.  Chloroprene rubber  
viii. Containers; nonexpanded plastic gridded or solid; col-

lapsed or nested with no air spaces  

ix.  ECTFE (ethylene-chlorotrifluoroethylene copolymer)  
x.  EPDM (ethylene-propylene rubber)  
xi.  ETFE (ethylene-tetrafluoroethylene copolymer)  
xii.  Ethyl Cellulose   
xiii. FEP (fluorinated ethylene-propylene copolymer)  
xiv. FRP (fiberglass-reinforced polyester)  
xv.  Melamine (melamine formaldehyde)  
xvi. Nitrile Rubber (acrylonitrile-butadiene rubber)  
xvii.Nylon (nylon 6, nylon 6/6)  
xviii.PCTFE (polychlorotrifluoroethylene)  
xix. PET (Polyethylene Terephthalate —thermoplastic polyes-

ter)  

xx.  Phenolic  
xxi. Plastics; stored in fully closed and solid (no openings), 

metal containers  
xxii.  Polybutadiene  
xxiii.  Polycarbonate  
xxiv.  Polyester elastomer  
xxv.  Polyethylene  
xxvi.  Polypropylene  
xxvii.  Polystyrene; foam products (plates, cups, etc.)  
xxviii. Polystyrene; rigid products   
xxix.  Polyurethane   
xxx.  PTFE (polytetrafluoroethylene)  
xxxi.  PVC (polyvinyl chloride) products, up to 20% plasticizer  
xxxii.  PVC (polyvinyl chloride) products, greater than 20% 

plasticizer  

xxxiii. PVC resins; bagged  
xxxiv. PVDC (polyvinylidene chloride)  
xxxv.  PVDF (polyvinylidene fluoride)  
xxxvi. PVF (polyvinyl fluoride)  
xxxvii.Rubber; natural in blocks; cartoned  
xxxviii.Rubber; natural; expanded  
xxxix. Rubber; natural; nonexpanded  
Rubber; synthetic (santoprene)  
xl. 
xli. 
SAN (styrene acrylonitrile)  
xlii.  SBR (styrene-butadiene rubber)  
xliii.  Silicone rubber Class IV 
xliv.  Urea (urea formaldehyde)  

COMMODITY 
CLASS 

Group A Non-expanded 
Group A Non-expanded 
Group A Non-expanded 
Group A Non-expanded 
Class IV 
Group A Non-expanded 
Class IV 
Group A Non-expanded 
 
Class IV 
Group A Non-expanded 
Class IV 
Group A Non-expanded 
Class IV 
Group A Non-expanded 
Class III 
Group A Non-expanded 
Group A Non-expanded 
Class III 
Group A Non-expanded 
 
Class III 
Class I 
 
Group A Non-expanded 
Group A Non-expanded 
Group A Non-expanded 
Group A Non-expanded 
Group A Non-expanded 
Group A Expanded 
Group A Non-expanded 
Group A Expanded 
Class III 
Class III 
Group A Nonexpanded 
 
Class III 
Class III 
Class III 
Group A Non-expanded 
Group A Non-expanded 
Group A Expanded 
Group A Non-expanded 
Group A Non-expanded 
Group A Non-expanded 
Group A Non-expanded 
Class IV 
Class III 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 540 of 1348 

 
 

Table 9.2: Classes of Materials/ Commodity 

PRODUCT           
CATEGORY 

PRODUCTS 

13. PLASTIC        
CONTAINERS 

i.  Plastic Containers Bottles or jars (except PET) greater 
than 1 gallon (4 L) containing noncombustible solids  

ii.  Bottles or jars (except PET) up to 1 gallon (4 L) contain-

ing noncombustible solids  

i.  Pharmaceutical pills; glass bottles or jars; cartoned  
ii.  Pharmaceuticals pills; plastic bottles or jars; cartoned  
iii.  Polyvinyl Alcohol (PVA) resins; bagged  
iv.  Powders; combustible (ordinary such as sugar or flour); 

free-flowing; bagged  

v.  Powders; noncombustible free-flowing powdered or 

granular materials (cement, calcium chloride, clay, iron 
oxide, sodium chloride, sodium silicate, etc.)  

vi.  Powders; noncombustible; glass bottles or jars; car-

tooned  

vii.  Powders; noncombustible; PET bottles or jars  
viii. Powders; noncombustible; plastic (other than PET) 

bottles or jars; uncartoned  

ix.  Powders; noncombustible; plastic bottles or jars greater 

than 1 gallon (4 L) capacity  

x.  Powders; noncombustible; plastic bottles or jars up to 1 

gallon (4 L) capacity; cartooned  

i.  Cloth; natural fibers; baled  
ii.  Cloth; synthetic cloth Class IV 
iii.  Clothing; natural fibers (e.g., wool, cotton) and viscose 
iv.  Cotton; cartoned  
v.  Diapers; cotton or linen 
vi.  Diapers; plastic or nonwoven fabric; cartoned Class IV 
vii.  Diapers; plastic or nonwoven fabric; plastic-wrapped; 

uncartoned  

viii. Fabric; rayon and nylon  
ix.  Fabric; synthetic (except rayon and nylon); greater than 

50/50 blend  

x.  Fabric; synthetic (except rayon and nylon); up to 50/50 

blend  

xi.  Fabric; vinyl-coated (e.g., tablecloth);  
xii.  Fibers; rayon and nylon; baled  
xiii. Fibers; synthetic (except rayon and nylon); baled  
xiv. Thread or yarn; rayon and nylon; wood or paper spools  
xv.  Thread or yarn; rayon or nylon; plastic spools  
xvi. Thread or yarn; synthetic (except rayon and nylon); 

greater than 50/50 blend; paper or wood spools  

xvii.Thread or yarn; synthetic (except rayon and nylon); 

greater than 50/50 blend; plastic spools   

xviii.Thread or yarn; synthetic (except rayon and nylon); up 

to 50/50 blend; plastic spools  

xix. Thread or yarn; synthetic (except rayon and nylon); up 

to 50/50 blend; wood or paper spools  

14. POWDERS/ 

PILLS 

15. TEXTILE   

MATERIALS 

 

COMMODITY 
CLASS 

Group A Non-expanded 
 
Group A Non-expanded 
 

Class II 
Class IV 
Class IV 
Class II 
 
Class I 
 
 
Class I 
 
Class II 
Group A Non-expanded 
 
Group A Non-expanded 
 
Class IV 

Class III 
Class IV 
Class III 
Class III 
Class III 
Class IV 
Group A Non-expanded 
 
Class IV 
Group A Non-expanded 
 
Class III 
 
Group A Nonexpanded 
Class IV 
Group A Nonexpanded 
Class IV 
Group A Nonexpanded 
Class IV 
 
Group A Nonexpanded 
 
Group A Nonexpanded 
 
Class III 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 541 of 1348 

Table 9.2: Classes of Materials/ Commodity 

PRODUCT           
CATEGORY 

PRODUCTS 

COMMODITY 
CLASS 

16. WAX 

17. WIRE/  
CABLE/ 
SPOOLS 

i.  Candles Group A Expanded 
ii.  Paraffin or petroleum wax; blocks Group A Expanded 

Group A Expanded 
Group A Expanded 

i.  Spools; plastic; empty  
ii.  Spools; wood; empty  
iii.  Wire or cable; PVC insulated; metal or wood spools  
iv.  Wire or cable; PVC insulated; plastic spools  
v.  Wire; bare; metal spools, uncartoned  
vi.  Wire; bare; metal spools; cartoned  
vii.  Wire; bare; plastic spools; cartoned  
viii. Wire; bare; plastic spools; uncartoned  
ix.  Wire; bare; wood or cardboard spools  

Group A Nonexpanded 
Class III 
Class II 
Class IV 
Class I 
Class II 
Class IV 
Group A Nonexpanded 
Class II 

18. WOOD 

PRODUCTS 

i.  Wood patterns  
ii.  Wood products (e.g., fiberboard, lumber, particle board, 
plywood, pressboard with smooth ends and edges); bun-
dled solid blocks 

iii.  Wood products (e.g., fiberboard, lumber, particle board, 

plywood, pressboard with smooth ends and edges); un-
bundled or non-solid blocks  

iv.  Wood products (e.g., toothpicks, clothespins and hangers 

Class IV 
Class II 
 
 
Class III 
 
 
Class III 

 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 542 of 1348An assembled unit consisting of a fire pump, driver, controller, and accessories. 

A pump that is a provider of liquid flow and pressure dedicated to fire protection. 

 

1.2.  Fire Pumps 
 

1.2.1.  Fire Pump Unit 
 
 
1.2.2.  Fire Pump 
 
 
1.2.3.  Fire Pump Controller 
 

A group of devices that serve to govern, in some predetermined manner, the 
starting and stopping of the fire pump driver and to monitor and signal the status 
and condition of the fire pump unit. 

A pump with the shaft normally in a horizontal position. 

 
1.2.4.  Horizontal Pump 
 
 
1.2.5.  Horizontal Split-Case Pump 
 
 
1.2.6.  Vertical Lineshaft Turbine Pump 
 

A centrifugal pump characterized by a housing that is split parallel to the shaft. 

A vertical shaft centrifugal pump with rotating impeller or impellers and with dis-
charge from the pumping element coaxial with the shaft. The pumping element is 
suspended by the conductor system, which encloses a system of vertical shafting 
used to transmit power to the impellers, the prime mover being external to the 
flow stream. 

 
1.2.7.  Total Head, Horizontal Pumps 
 

The measure of the work increase, per kilogram (pound) of liquid, imparted to the 
liquid by the pump, and therefore the algebraic difference between the total dis-
charge head and the total suction head. Total head, as determined on test where 
suction lift exists, is the sum of the total discharge head and total suction lift.  

 
1.2.8.  Total Head, Vertical Turbine Pumps 
 

The distance from the pumping water level to the center of the discharge gauge 
plus the total discharge head. 

 
1.2.9.  Total Discharge Head 
 

The reading of a pressure gauge at the discharge of the pump, converted to meters 
(feet) of liquid, and referred to datum, plus the velocity head at the point of gauge 
attachment. 

 
1.2.10.  Total Rated Head 
 

The total head developed at rated capacity and rated speed for either a horizontal 
split-case or a vertical shaft turbine–type pump. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 543 of 1348 

1.2.  Fire Pumps 
 

1.2.11.  Total Suction Head 
 

Suction head exists where the total suction head is above atmospheric pressure. 
Total suction head, as determined on test, is the reading of a gauge at the suction 
of the pump, converted to meters (feet) of liquid, and referred to datum, plus the 
velocity head at the point of gauge attachment. 

 
1.2.12.  Centrifugal Pump 
 

A pump in which the pressure is developed principally by the action of centrifugal 
force. 

 
1.2.13.  End Suction Pump 
 

A single suction pump having its suction nozzle on the opposite side of the casing 
from the stuffing box and having the face of the suction nozzle perpendicular to 
the longitudinal axis of the shaft. 

 
1.2.14.  Automatic Transfer Switch 
 

Self-acting equipment for transferring one or more load conductor connections 
from one power source to another. 

 
1.2.15.  Diesel Engine 
 

An internal combustion engine in which the fuel is ignited entirely by the heat re-
sulting from the compression of the air supplied for combustion. The oil-diesel en-
gine, which operates on fuel oil injected after compression is practically complet-
ed, is the type usually used as a fire pump driver. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 544 of 1348 

1.3.  Fire Hose Systems 
 

1.3.1.  Fire Hose Cabinet (FHC) 
 

A cabinet housing combination of instantaneous connection outlets for Landing 
Valve, Hose reel along with, nozzle and fire extinguishers. 

 
1.3.2.  Landing Valve 
 

A 65 mm diameter instantaneous water outlet normally located near the staircase 
for trained or Civil Defence fire fighters to use during fire. 

 
1.3.3.  Hose Reel or Hose Rack  
 

A 25 mm Hose reel or 40 mm diameter Hose rack, instantaneous water outlet with 
a connected hose for trained occupants or Civil Defence fire fighters to use during 
fire. 

1.3.4.  Standpipe 
 

The vertical portion of the system piping that delivers the water supply for hose 
connections (and sprinklers on combined systems), vertically from floor to floor. 
The term standpipe can also refer to the horizontal portion of the system piping 
that delivers the water supply for two or more hose connections (and sprinklers on 
combined systems) on a single level. 

 
1.3.5.  Combined System 
 

A piping system that feeds both Landing valves, Hose systems and Sprinkler system 
network. 

 
1.3.6.  Dry Riser System (Manual Standpipe System) 
 

Dry riser systems are normally dry without permanent water connection to them 
and depend on the Civil Defence fire truck to pump water into the system. Dry ris-
er system comprises of one or multiple vertical riser pipes or horizontal runs of 
piping that are terminated to the two way breeching inlets located at the ground 
level and connected to the 65mm diameter landing (Fire Department) valve outlets 
coupled or uncoupled with 65mm diameter, 30 m long re-inforced rubber lined 
(RRL) hose with multipurpose hose nozzle that are placed inside a cabinet for the 
use of Civil Defence personnel or other trained fire fighting personnel.  

 
1.3.7.  Wet Riser System (Wet Standpipe System) 

Wet riser systems are normally pressurized with water having permanent water 
supply from fire water pumps and fire water storage tanks. Wet riser system com-
prises of one or multiple vertical riser pipes or horizontal runs of piping that feed 
the Sprinkler System, Water Spray System as well as Hose and Landing Valve con-
nections. These risers are connected to fire pumps and fire water storage tanks 
located within the buildings. 25mm for Hose Reel System, 40 mm for Hose Rack 
system, 65 mm diameter for Landing Valve tapping will be made from the wet riser 
in each floor level and fitted with multipurpose hoses and nozzles that are placed 
inside a cabinet for the use of Civil Defence personnel or other trained fire fighting 
personnel. In addition the four way breeching inlets located at ground level are 
connected to the bottom of the wet riser to pump water from the Civil Defence 
fire truck as supplementary water supply. 

 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 545 of 1348 

1.3.  Fire Hose Systems 
 

1.3.8.  Class I Hose System 

 

 

Class I systems comprises of 65 mm diameter Landing Valve outlets coupled or un-
coupled with 65mm diameter, 30 m long, double jacket synthetic fiber reinforced 
hose with a multipurpose hose nozzle for the use of Civil Defence department per-
sonnel or other trained fire fighting personnel. 

1.3.9.  Class II Hose System 

Class II systems comprise of 25 mm diameter bore for Hose Reel System or 40 mm 
diameter bore for a Hose Rack System, 30 m long double jacket synthetic fiber re-
inforced, coupled with 6 or 8 mm bore multipurpose nozzle, for the use of occu-
pants to extinguish small fires or when the fire is at its incipient stages until the 
arrival of Civil Defence fire fighters.  

1.3.10.  Class III Hose System 
 

Class III system is a combination of both Class I & Class II systems for the use of 
trained personnel and as well as Civil Defence use. In general the class I system 
equipment are installed in lower level or compartment of the FHC and class II sys-
tem equipment in upper level or compartment of FHC.  

1.3.11.  Wet Riser Zoning 
 

A vertical subdivision of a standpipe system by height. 

1.3.12.  High Zone 
 

The high zone within a subdivided standpipe system which is usually due to pres-
sure limitations of the design. (When wet riser FHC height exceeds 45 m from 
pump location or when pressure in the system exceeds 12 bar, standpipe is ar-
ranged in a separate looped zone, known as High Zone).  

 
1.3.13.  Low Zone 
 

The low zone within a subdivided standpipe system which is usually due to pres-
sure limitations of the design. (When wet riser FHC height exceeds 45 m from 
pump location or when pressure in the system exceeds 12 bar, lower section of 
standpipe is arranged in a separate zone, within 12 bar range, known as Low 
Zone).  

 
1.3.14.  Static Pressure 

 Pressure acting on a point in the piping with no flow from the system. 

1.3.15.  Residual Pressure 

 Pressure acting on a point in the piping with flow being delivered or discharged. 

1.3.16.  Pressure Reducing Valve 

 A valve designed for the purpose of reducing the downstream water pressure un-

der both flowing (residual) and no flowing (static) conditions. 

1.3.17.  Rated Capacity 

 The flow available from an outlet, at the designated residual pressure. 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 546 of 1348 

1.4.  Automatic Sprinkler Systems 
 

1.4.1.  Automatic Sprinkler 
 

A fire suppression or control device that operates (bursts) automatically when its 
heat-activated element is heated to its thermal rating or above, allowing water to 
discharge over a specified area. 

 
1.4.2.  Automatic Sprinkler System 
 

For fire protection purposes, the sprinkler system installation includes one or more 
automatic water supplies. The portion of the sprinkler system is a network of spe-
cially sized or hydraulically designed piping installed in a building, structure, or ar-
ea, generally overhead, and to which sprinklers are attached in a systematic 
pattern. The valve controlling each system riser is located in the system riser or its 
supply piping. Each sprinkler system riser includes a device for actuating an alarm 
when the system is in operation. The system is usually activated by heat from a fire 
and discharges water over the fire area. 

 
1.4.3.  High-Piles storage 
 

Solid-piled, palletized, rack storage, bin box, and shelf storage in excess of 3.7 m in 
height. 

 
1.4.4.  Hydraulically Designed System  
 

A calculated sprinkler system in which pipe sizes are selected on a pressure loss 
basis to provide a prescribed water density, in gallons per minute per square foot 
(mm/min), or a prescribed minimum discharge pressure or flow per sprinkler, dis-
tributed with a reasonable degree of uniformity over a specified area. 

 
1.4.5.  Pipe Schedule System 
 

A sprinkler system in which the pipe sizing is selected from a schedule that is de-
termined by the occupancy classification and in which a given number of sprinklers 
are allowed to be supplied from specific sizes of pipe. 

 
1.4.6.  System Working Pressure 
 

The maximum anticipated static (non flowing) or flowing pressure applied to sprin-
kler system components exclusive of surge pressures. 

 
1.4.7.  Closed loop Sprinkler System 
 

A wet pipe sprinkler system having non–fire protection connections to automatic 
sprinkler systems in a closed-loop piping arrangement for the purpose of utilizing 
sprinkler piping to conduct water for heating or cooling, where water is not re-
moved or used from the system but only circulated through the piping system. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 547 of 13481.4.  Automatic Sprinkler Systems 

 
1.4.8.  Dry pipe Pre-action Sprinkler System 
 

A sprinkler system employing automatic sprinklers attached to a piping system 
containing air under pressure with a supplemental detection system installed in 
the same areas as the sprinklers. The operation of the detection system actuates 
tripping devices that open dry pipe valves simultaneously and without loss of air 
pressure in the system. The operation of the detection system also opens listed air 
exhaust valves at the end of the feed main, which usually precedes the opening of 
sprinklers. The detection system also serves as an automatic fire alarm system. 

 
1.4.9.  Deluge Sprinkler System 
 

A sprinkler system employing open sprinklers that are attached to a piping system 
that is connected to a water supply through a valve that is opened by the opera-
tion of a detection system installed in the same areas as the sprinklers. When this 
valve opens, water flows into the piping system and discharges from all sprinklers 
attached thereto. 

The pipes in which the sprinklers are placed, either directly or through risers. 

 
1.4.10.  Branch line 
 
 
1.4.11.  Cross Mains  
 
 
1.4.12.  Feed Mains 
 
 

  

The pipes supplying the branch lines, either directly or through risers. 

The pipes supplying cross mains, either directly or through risers. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 548 of 1348 

 

1.4.  Automatic Sprinkler Systems 

 
 
1.4.14.  Types of Sprinklers, based on installation orientation 
 

1.4.14.1. Upright Sprinkler Head 

A sprinkler designed to be installed in such a way that the water spray is 
directed upwards against the deflector.  
 

1.4.14.2. Pendent Sprinkler Head 

A sprinkler designed to be installed in such a way that the water stream 
is directed downward against the deflector. In pendent there are two 
types based on its mounting application.  
 

1.4.14.3. Recessed Pendent Sprinkler Head 

A sprinkler in which all or part of the body, other than the shank thread, 
is mounted within a recessed housing.  
 

1.4.14.4. Concealed Pendent Sprinkler Head 

A recessed sprinkler concealed with cover plates.  
 

1.4.14.5. Conventional Sprinkler Head 

A sprinkler that is designed to install both pendent or upright position. 

 

 1.4.14.6. Sidewall Sprinkler Head 

A sprinkler having special deflectors that are designed to discharge most 
of the water away from the nearby wall in a pattern resembling one-
quarter of a sphere, with a small portion of the discharge directed at the 
wall behind the sprinkler. 

Figure 9.1.: Types of Sprinklers based on orientation 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 549 of 1348 

1.4.  Automatic Sprinkler Systems 

 
 

1.4.15.  Types of Sprinklers, based on Coverage 
 

1.4.15.1. Standard Coverage Sprinkler Head 

A sprinkler that directs from 40 percent to 60 percent of the total water 
initially in a downward direction and that is designed to be installed 
with the deflector either upright or pendent. Nominal K-factors for 
standard ½ in. *12.7 mm+ sprinklers are 5.6 *Km = 80+. 

 

1.4.15.2. Extended Coverage Sprinkler Head 

Extended coverage sidewall sprinklers are used in the horizontal posi-
tion. They have larger areas of coverage than the areas of coverage al-
lowed for standard sidewall sprinklers. They may be used in light-
hazard occupancies. 

 

1.4.15.3. Large Drop Sprinkler Head 

A type of specific application control mode sprinkler sprinklers with a 
nominal K-factor of 11.2 (Km = 160) The deflector of a large drop sprin-
kler is specially designed and, combined with the greater discharge, 
produces large drops of such size and velocity as to enable the spray to 
penetrate strong updrafts generated by high-challenge fire hazards. 

 
1.4.16.  Types of Sprinklers, based on Heat Sensing Element 
 

1.4.16.1. Standard Response Sprinkler Head 

A type of spray sprinkler that has thermal sensitivity measured in re-
sponse time index (RTI) of 80 (meters-seconds)1/2 or more. 

 

1.4.16.2. Early Suppression Fast-Response (ESFR) Sprinkler  

A type of fast-response sprinkler that has thermal sensitivity measured 
in response time index (RTI) of 50 (meter-seconds)1/2 or less and is listed 
for its capability to provide fire suppression of specific high-challenge 
fire hazards. 

 
1.4.17.  Closed Array 
 

A storage arrangement where air movement through the pile is restricted because 
of 6-in. (152-mm) or less vertical flues. 

 
1.4.18.  Open Array 
 

A storage arrangement where air movement through the pile is enhanced because 
of vertical flues larger than 6 in. (152 mm). 

 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 550 of 13481.4.  Automatic Sprinkler Systems 

 
1.4.19.  Bin Box Storage 
 

Storage in five-sided wood, metal, or cardboard boxes with open face on the aisles. 
Boxes are self-supporting or supported by a structure so designed that little or no 
horizontal or vertical space exists around boxes. 

 The distance from the top of storage to the ceiling sprinkler deflectors. 

 
1.4.20.  Clearance 
 
 
1.4.21.  Encapsulation 
 

A method of packaging consisting of a plastic sheet completely enclosing the sides 
and top of a pallet load containing a combustible commodity or a combustible 
package or a group of combustible commodities or combustible packages. Com-
bustible commodities individually wrapped in plastic sheeting and stored exposed 
in a pallet load also are to be considered encapsulated. 

 
1.4.22.  Expanded (Foamed or Cellular) Plastics 
 

Those plastics, the density of which is reduced by the presence of numerous small 
cavities (cells), interconnecting or not, dispersed throughout their mass. 

 
1.4.23.  Exposed Group A Plastics 
 

Those plastics not in packaging or coverings that absorb water or otherwise appre-
ciably retard the burning hazard of the commodity. (Paper wrapped or encapsulat-
ed, or both, should be considered exposed.) 

 
1.4.24.  Palletized Storage 
 

Storage of commodities on pallets or other storage aids that form horizontal spac-
es between tiers of storage. 

 
1.4.25.  Shelf Storage 
 

Storage on structures less than 30 in. (76.2 cm) deep with shelves usually 2 ft. (0.6 
m) apart vertically and separated by approximately 30-in. (76.2-cm) aisles. 

 
1.4.26.  Rack 
 

Any combination of vertical, horizontal, and diagonal members that supports 
stored materials. Some rack structures use solid shelves. Racks can be fixed, porta-
ble, or movable. Loading can be either manual, using lift trucks, stacker cranes, or 
hand placement or automatic , using machine-controlled storage and retrieval sys-
tems. 

 
1.4.27.  Double Row Racks 
 

Two single-row racks placed back-to-back having a combined width up to 3.7 m, 
with aisles at least 1.1 m on each side. 

 
1.4.28.  Single Row Racks 
 

Racks that have no longitudinal flue space and that have a width up to 1.8 m with 
aisles at least 1.1 m from other storage. 

 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 551 of 13481.4.  Automatic Sprinkler Systems 

 
 
1.4.29.  Multiple Row Racks 
 

Racks greater than 3.7 m wide or single- or double-row racks separated by aisles 
less than 1.1 m wide having an overall width greater than 3.7 m. 

K-factor is a dimensionless number used in fire protection hydraulics. 

 
1.4.30.  K-factor 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Q =K      P   OR K = Q/P0.5  Where,  

the Flow in gpm (L/Min),  
the Pressure in psi (bar) 

Q is 
P is 
K is a flow constant factor 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 552 of 1348 

1.5.  Foam Systems 

 
1.5.1.  Foam 
 

 Foam is a stable aggregation of small gas filled bubbles of lower density than oil or 
water, formed from aqueous solutions of specially formulated concentrated liquid 
foaming agents that exhibits a tenacity for covering horizontal surfaces, producing 
an air excluding, cooling continuous layer of vapour-sealing, water-bearing materi-
al that prevents combustion.  

 
1.5.2.  Foam Concentrate 
 

Foam concentrate is a concentrated liquid foaming agent as received from the 
manufacturer. 

 
1.5.3.  Foam Solution  
 

A homogeneous mixture of water and foam concentrate in the proper proportions. 
For the purpose of this document, “foam solution” and “solution” are used inter-
changeably. 

 
1.5.4.  Foam Proportioning 
 

Proportioning is the continuous introduction of foam concentrate at the recom-
mended ratio into the water stream to form foam solution 

 
1.5.5.  Foam-Water Sprinkler System  
 

A special system that is pipe-connected to a source of foam concentrate and to a 
water supply. The system is equipped with appropriate discharge devices for extin-
guishing agent discharge and for distribution over the area to be protected. The 
piping system is connected to the water supply through a control valve that usually 
is actuated by the operation of automatic detection equipment that is installed in 
the same areas as the sprinklers. When this valve opens, water flows into the pip-
ing system, foam concentrate is injected into the water, and the resulting foam 
solution discharging through the discharge devices generates and distributes foam. 
Upon exhaustion of the foam concentrate supply, water discharge follows and con-
tinues until shut off manually. Systems can be used for discharge of water first, 
followed by a discharge of foam for a specified period, and then followed by water 
until they manually shut off. Existing deluge sprinkler systems that have been con-
verted to the use of aqueous film-forming foam or film-forming fluoroprotein foam 
are classified as foam-water sprinkler systems. 

 
1.5.6.  Foam-Water Deluge System  
 

A foam-water sprinkler system employing open discharge devices, which are 
attached to a piping system that is connected to a water supply through a valve 
that is opened by the operation of a detection system, which is installed in the 
same areas as the discharge devices. When this valve opens, water flows into the 
piping system and discharges from all discharge devices attached thereto. 

 
1.5.7.  Foam Discharge Duration 
 

Systems shall deliver foam to the hazards they protect for a specified period at giv-
en densities, either prior to water discharge or following water discharge, depend-
ing upon system design purpose. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 553 of 1348 

1.5.  Foam Systems 

 
1.5.8.  Aqueous Film Forming Foam (AFFF) Concentrate  
 

This concentrate is based on fluorinated surfactants plus foam stabilizers and usu-
ally diluted with water to a 1 percent, 3 percent, or 6 percent solution. The foam 
formed acts as a barrier both to exclude air or oxygen and to develop an aqueous 
film on the fuel surface capable of suppressing the evolution of fuel vapors. The 
foam produced with AFFF concentrate is dry chemical compatible and thus is suita-
ble for combined use with dry chemicals. 

 
1.5.9.  Film Forming Flouroprotein (AFFP) Foam Concentrate  
 

This concentrate uses fluorinated surfactants to produce a fluid aqueous film for 
suppressing hydrocarbon fuel vapors. This type of foam utilizes a protein base plus 
stabilizing additives and inhibitors to protect against freezing, corrosion, and bac-
terial decomposition, and it also resists fuel pickup. The foam is usually diluted 
with water to a 3 percent or 6 percent solution and is dry chemical compatible. 

 
1.5.10.  Alcohol Resistant Foam Concentrate  
 

This concentrate is used for fighting fires on water-soluble materials and other 
fuels destructive to regular, AFFF, or FFFP foams, as well as for fires involving hy-
drocarbons. There are three general types. One is based on water-soluble natural 
polymers, such as protein or fluoroprotein concentrates, and also contains alcohol-
insoluble materials that precipitate as an insoluble barrier in the bubble structure. 
The second type is based on synthetic concentrates and contains a gelling agent 
that surrounds the foam bubbles and forms a protective raft on the surface of wa-
ter-soluble fuels; these foams can also have film-forming characteristics on hydro-
carbon fuels. The third type is based on both water-soluble natural polymers, such 
as fluoroprotein, and contains a gelling agent that protects the foam from water-
soluble fuels. This foam can also have film-forming and fluoroprotein characteris-
tics on hydrocarbon fuels. Alcohol-resistant foam concentrates are generally used 
in concentrations of 3 percent to 10 percent solutions, depending on the nature of 
the hazard to be protected and the type of concentrate. 

 
1.5.11.  Medium and High Expansion Foam Concentrate  
 

This concentrate, which is usually derived from hydrocarbon surfactants, is used in 
specially designed equipment to produce foams having foam-to-solution volume 
ratios of 20:1 to approximately 1000:1. This equipment can be air-aspirating or 
blower-fan type. 

 
1.5.12.  Air Aspirating Discharging Devices  
 

Devices specially designed to aspirate and mix air into the foam solution to gener-
ate foam, followed by foam discharge in a specific design pattern. 

Devices designed to provide a specific water discharge pattern. 

 
1.5.13.  Non-Air Aspirating Discharging Devices  
 
 
1.5.14.  Fixed Foam Discharge Outlet.  
 

A device permanently attached to a tank, dike, or other containment structure, 
designed to introduce foam. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 554 of 1348 
1.5.17.  Expansion 
 
 
1.5.18.  Semi subsurface Foam Injection 
 

 
1.5.19.  Subsurface Foam Injection 
 
 
1.5.20.  Fixed System 
 

Discharge of foam at the liquid surface within a storage tank from a floating hose 
that rises from a piped container near the tank bottom. 

Discharge of foam into a storage tank from an outlet near the tank bottom. 

 

1.5.  Foam Systems 

 
1.5.15.  Type I Discharge Outlet.  
 

An approved discharge outlet that conducts and delivers foam gently onto the liq-
uid surface without submergence of the foam or agitation of the surface. 

 
1.5.16.  Type II Discharge Outlet.  
 

An approved discharge outlet that does not deliver foam gently onto the liquid 
surface but is designed to lessen submergence of the foam and agitation of the 
surface. 

The ratio of the final foam volume to the original foam solution volume. 

A complete installation in which foam is piped from a central foam station, dis-
charging through fixed delivery outlets to the hazard to be protected with perma-
nently installed pumps where required. 

 
1.5.21.  Mobile System 
 

Any type of foam-producing unit that is mounted on wheels and that is self-
propelled or towed by a vehicle and can be connected to a water supply or can 
utilize a premixed foam solution. 

 
1.5.22.  Fixed Monitor (Cannon) 
 

A device that delivers a large foam stream and is mounted on a stationary support 
that either is elevated or is at grade. 

 
1.5.23.  Portable Monitor (Cannon) 
 

A device that delivers a foam monitor stream and is mounted on a movable sup-
port or wheels so it can be transported to the fire scene. 

 
1.5.24.  Balanced Pressure Bladder Tank 
 

A foam concentrate tank fitted with an internal bladder which uses water flow 
through a modified venturi type proportioner to control the foam concentrate in-
jection rate by displacing the foam concentrate within the bladder with water out-
side the bladder. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 555 of 1348 

1.6.  Water Spray Systems 

 
1.6.1.  Water Spray 
 

Water in a form having a predetermined pattern, particle size, velocity, and density 
discharge from specially designed nozzles or devices. 

 
1.6.2.  Automatic Water Spray Nozzle 
 

A nozzle intended to open automatically by the operation of a heat responsive ele-
ment that maintains the discharge orifice closed by means such as the exertion of 
force on a cap (button or disc), that when discharging water under pressure, will 
distribute the water in a specific and, directional pattern. 

 
1.6.3.  Open Water Spray Nozzle 
 

An open water discharge device that, when discharging water under pressure, will 
distribute the water in a specific, directional pattern. 

 
1.6.4.  Deluge Valve 
 

A type of system actuation valve that is opened by the operation of a discharging 
device installed in the same areas as the spray nozzles or by remote manual opera-
tion supplying water to all spray nozzles. 

 
1.6.5.  System Actuation Valve 
 
 
1.6.6.  Density  
 

The main valve that controls the flow of water into the water spray system. 

The unit rate of water application to an area or surface expressed in gpm/ft2
min)/m2 . 

  or L/

 
1.6.7.  Exposure Protection 
 

Absorption of heat through application of water spray to structures or equipment 
exposed to a fire, to limit surface temperature to a level that will minimize damage 
and prevent failure. 

 
1.6.8.  Electrical Clearance 
 

The air distance between the water spray equipment, including piping and nozzles, 
and unenclosed or uninsulated live electrical components at other than ground 
potential. 

 
1.6.9.  Pilot Sprinkler 
 

An automatic sprinkler or thermostatic fixed temperature release device used as a 
detector to pneumatically or hydraulically release the system actuation valve. 

 
1.6.10.  Area Application 
 

The application of ultra high-speed water spray over a specific floor area or over 
the surface area of a specific object. 

 
1.6.11.  Local Application 
 

The application of ultra high-speed water spray on a specific point or points of igni-
tion, such as cutting, mixing or grinding operations. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 556 of 1348 

1.6.  Water Spray Systems 

 
 
1.6.12.  Pilot Sprinkler 
 

An automatic sprinkler or thermostatic fixed temperature release device used as a 
detector to pneumatically or hydraulically release the system actuation valve. 

 
1.6.13.  Fire Area 
 

An area that is physically separated from other areas by space, barriers, walls, or 
other means in order to contain fire within that area. 

 
1.6.14.  Impingement 
 

The striking of a protected surface by water droplets issuing directly from a water 
spray nozzle. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 557 of 1348 

1.7.  Yard Hydrant Systems 

 
 
1.7.1.  Fire Service Access Level 
 

Level where Civil Defence Fire Appliances (Fire Truck/Engine) are deployed and 
where fire fighters have direct access into the building . 

 
1.7.2.  Fire Access Roadway 
 

The road to the building or structure to allow access for Civil Defence fire-fighting 
and rescue apparatus. 

 
1.7.3.  Fire Accessway 
 

The path adjacent to the building or structure to allow operational setup for Civil 
Defence fire-fighting and rescue apparatus such as Aerial Appliances.  

 
1.7.4.  Rated Capacity 
 

The flow available from a hydrant at the designated residual pressure (rated pres-
sure), either measured or calculated. 

 
1.7.5.  Residual Pressure 
 

The pressure that exists in the distribution system, measured at the residual hy-
drant at the time the flow readings are taken at the flow hydrants. 

 
1.7.6.  Static Pressure 
 

The pressure that exists at a given point under normal distribution system condi-
tions measured at the residual hydrant with no hydrants flowing. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 558 of 1348 

1.7.  Clean Agent Systems 

 
1.7.1.  Clean Agent 
 

Electrically nonconducting, volatile, or gaseous fire extinguishing agent that does 
not leave a residue upon discharge.  

 
1.7.2.  Clean Agent Concentration 
 
 
1.7.3.  Halocarbon Agent 
 

The portion of agent in an agent-air mixture expressed in volume percent. 

An agent that contains as primary components one or more organic compounds 
containing one or more of the elements fluorine, chlorine, bromine, or iodine. 

 
1.7.4. 
 

Inert Gas Agent 
An agent that contains as primary components one or more of the gases helium, 
neon, argon, or nitrogen. Inert gas agents that are blends of gases can also contain 
carbon dioxide as a secondary component. 

 
1.7.5.  Total Flooding Quantity 
 
 
1.7.6.  Minimum Design Quantity (MDQ) 
 
 
1.7.7.  Design Factor 
   

The amount of halocarbon agent required to achieve the design concentration. 

The quantity of agent required to achieve the minimum design concentration. 

A fraction of the agent minimum design quantity (MDQ) added thereto deemed 
appropriate due to a specific feature of the protection application or design of the 
suppression system. 

1.7.8.  Final Design Quantity 
 

The quantity of agent determined from the agent minimum design quantity as ad-
justed to account for design factors and pressure adjustment. 

1.7.9.  Local Application System.  
 

A system consisting of a supply of extinguishing agent arranged to discharge direct-
ly on the burning material or equipment. 

1.7.10.  Pre-Engineered System.  
 

A system having predetermined flow rates, nozzle pressures, and quantities of 
agent. These systems have the specific pipe size, maximum and minimum pipe 
lengths, flexible hose specifications, number of fittings, and number and types of 
nozzles prescribed by a testing laboratory. The hazards protected by these systems 
are specifically limited as to type and size by a testing laboratory based upon actual 
fire tests. Limitations on hazards that can be protected by these systems are con-
tained in the manufacturer’s installation manual, which is referenced as part of the 
listing. 

1.7.11.  Total Flooding System.  
 

A system consisting of an agent supply and distribution network with discharge 
nozzles designed to achieve a total flooding condition in a hazard volume. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 559 of 1348 

1.7.  Clean Agent Systems 

 
1.7.12.  Fill Density 
 

Mass of agent per unit of container volume (the customary units are lb/ft3 or kg/
m3). 

 
1.7.13.  No Observed Adverse Effect Level (NOAEL) 
 

The highest concentration at which no adverse toxicological or physiological effect 
has been observed. 

 
1.7.14.  Lowest Observed Adverse Effect Level (LOAEL) 
 

The lowest concentration at which adverse toxicological or physiological effect has 
been observed. 

Area that is intended for occupancy. 

 
1.7.15.  Normally Occupied Area 
 
 
1.7.16.  Unoccupied Area 
 

 

Area that is intended only for equipment and machinery providing services with 
periodic visits by personnel for repair and maintenance.   
However,  with respect to the use of clean agent systems, the LV rooms, transform-
er rooms, telephone rooms, generator rooms and other such equipment/  machin-
ery rooms located in the occupied buildings or attached to occupied buildings, are 
not considered as unoccupied area because of the proximity of these rooms to 
public movement and the  possible adverse effects of clean agents.   

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 560 of 1348 

1.8.  Dry Chemical Systems 

 
1.8.1.  Dry Chemical 
 

A powder composed of very small particles, usually sodium bicarbonate, potassium 
bicarbonate, or ammonium phosphate based with added particulate material sup-
plemented by a special treatment to provide resistance to packing, resistance to 
moisture absorption (caking), and the proper flow capabilities. 

 
1.8.2.  Multipurpose Dry Chemical 
 

Ammonium phosphate-based extinguishing agent that is effective on fires involv-
ing both ordinary combustibles, such as wood or paper, and fires involving flamma-
ble liquids. 

 
1.8.3.  Dry Chemical System 
 

A means of applying dry chemical that can be automatically or manually activated 
to discharge through a distribution system onto or into the protected hazard. The 
system includes auxiliary equipment. 

 
1.8.4.  Engineered System 
 

Those requiring individual calculation and design to determine the flow rates, noz-
zle pressures, pipe size, area or volume protected by each nozzle, quantities of dry 
chemical, number and types of nozzles, and their placement in a specific system. 

 
1.8.5.  Pre-Engineered Systems 
 

Those having predetermined flow rates, nozzle pressures, and quantities of dry 
chemical. 

 
1.8.6.  Local Application System 
 

A supply of dry chemical permanently connected to fixed piping with nozzles ar-
ranged to discharge directly onto the fire. 

 
1.8.7.  Total Flooding System 
 

A supply of dry chemical permanently connected to fixed piping and nozzles that 
are arranged to discharge dry chemical into an enclosure surrounding the hazard. 

The medium used to discharge dry chemicals from container. 

 
1.8.8.  Expellant Gas 
 
 
1.8.9.  Discharge Nozzle 
 

Device from which the dry chemical is discharged to provide for the suppression of 
a fire in the designated hazard. 

 
1.8.10.  Caking 
 

A phenomenon that occurs when moisture chemically reacts with a dry chemical 
fire-extinguishing agent. This reaction results in materials that, being hydrated by 
moisture, stick together to form a large agglomerate, or what is more commonly 
referred to as lumps. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 561 of 1348 

1.9.  Wet Chemical Systems 

 
1.9.1.  Wet Chemical, Liquid Agent, Wet Agent 
 

Normally an aqueous solution of organic or inorganic salts or a combination there-
of that forms an extinguishing agent. 

 
1.9.2.  Pre-Engineered Systems 
 

Those having predetermined flow rates, nozzle pressures, and quantities of extin-
guishing agent. These systems have the specific pipe size, maximum and minimum 
pipe lengths, flexible hose specifications, number of fittings, and number and types 
of nozzles prescribed by a testing laboratory. The maximum and minimum pipe 
lengths and the number of fittings shall be permitted to be expressed in equivalent 
feet of pipe. The hazards protected by these systems are specifically limited as to 
type and size by a testing laboratory, based on actual fire tests. Limitations on haz-
ards that are permitted to be protected by these systems and piping and nozzle 
configurations are contained in the manufacturer’s listed installation and mainte-
nance manual, which is part of the listing of the system. Pre-engineered systems 
can be wet as well as dry chemical systems. 

 
1.9.3.  Automatic Operation 
 

Operation without human intervention. This operation includes, but is not limited 
to, heat, rate of heat rise, smoke, or pressure change. 

The medium used to discharge the extinguishing agent from container. 

 
1.9.4.  Expellant Gas 
 
 
1.9.5.  Auxiliary Equipment 
 

 
1.9.6.  Branch Duct 
 
 
1.9.7.  Common Duct 
 
 
1.9.8.  Recharge 
 
 

Listed equipment used in conjunction with the wet chemical systems, for example, 
to shut down power, fuel, or ventilation to the hazard being protected or to initi-
ate signaling devices. 

The duct work that contains the exhaust air from a single hood or hazard area. 

The duct work containing the exhaust air from two or more branch ducts. 

The replacement of the extinguishing agent and expellant gas. 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 562 of 1348 

1.10.  Water Mist Systems 

 
1.10.1.  Water Mist 
 

A water spray for which the Dv0.99, ( Dvf -A drop diameter such that the cumulative 
volume, from zero diameter to this respective diameter, is the fraction, f, of the 
corresponding sum of the total distribution) for the flow-weighted cumulative vol-
umetric distribution of water droplets is less than 1000 μm within the nozzle oper-
ating pressure range. 

 
1.10.2.  Water Mist System 
 

A distribution system connected to a water supply or water and atomizing media 
supply that is equipped with one or more nozzles capable of delivering water mist 
intended to control, suppress, or extinguish fires and that has been demonstrated 
to meet the performance requirements of its listing and this standard. 

 
1.10.3.  Water Mist Atomizing Media 
 

Compressed air or other gases that produce water mist by mechanical mixing with 
water. 

 
1.10.4.  Water Mist Nozzle 
 

A special purpose device, containing one or more orifices, designed to produce and 
deliver a water spray meeting either the definition of ‘water mist’ or meeting the 
specific requirements of an approved water mist fire test protocol. 

Any chemical or mixture of chemicals intentionally introduced into the system. 

 
1.10.5.  Additive 
 
 
1.10.6.  High Pressure System 
 

A water mist system where the distribution system piping is exposed to pressures 
of 34.5 bar (500 psi) or greater. 

 
1.10.7.  Intermediate Pressure System 
 

A water mist system where the distribution system piping is exposed to pressures 
greater than 12.1 bar (175 psi) but less than 34.5 bar (500 psi). 

 
1.10.8.  Low Pressure System 
 

A water mist system where the distribution piping is exposed to pressures of 12.1 
bar (175 psi) or less. 

 
1.10.9.  Propellant  
 

Compressed gas used as a prime mover to push water out of storage vessels, 
through pipe networks, or through distribution components. 

 
1.10.10.  Single Fuel System  

 A water mist system utilizing a single piping system to supply each nozzle 

. 
1.10.11.  Twin Fuel System  

 A water mist system in which water and an atomizing medium are supplied to 
the water mist nozzle utilizing a separate piping system for each medium or a 
single piping system for both. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 563 of 1348 

1.10.  Water Mist Systems 

 
1.10.12.  Deluge Water Mist System 
 

A water mist system utilizing nonautomatic mist nozzles (open) attached to a 
piping network connected to the fluid supply(ies) through a valve controlled by 
an independent detection system installed in the same area as the mist nozzles. 

 
1.10.13.  Dry Pipe Water Mist System 
 

A water mist system using automatic nozzles attached to a piping system con-
taining air, nitrogen, or inert gas under pressure, the release of which (as from 
an opening of an automatic nozzle) allows the water pressure to open a dry pipe 
valve. The water then flows into the piping system and out through any open 
nozzles. 

 
1.10.14.  Engineered Water Mist System 
 

Those systems that need individual calculation and design to determine the flow 
rates, nozzle pressures, pipe size, area, or volume protected by each nozzle, dis-
charge density of water mist, the number and types of nozzles, and the nozzle 
placement in a specific system. 

 
1.10.15.  Local Application Water Mist System 
 

A water mist system arranged to discharge directly on an object or hazard in an 
enclosed, unenclosed, or open outdoor condition. 

 
 
1.10.16.  Pre-action Water Mist System 
 

A water mist system using automatic nozzles attached to a piping system that 
contains air that might or might not be under pressure, with a supplemental de-
tection system installed in the same areas as the mist nozzles. The actuation of 
the detection system opens a valve that allows water to flow into the piping sys-
tem and discharges through all opened nozzles in the system. 

 
1.10.17.  Wet Pipe Water Mist System 
 

A water mist system using automatic nozzles attached to a piping system con-
taining water and connected to a water supply so that water discharges immedi-
ately from nozzles operated by the heat from a fire. 

 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 564 of 1348 

2.  Fire Protection Systems 

 

2.1.  Intention 

 2.1.1.   The Fire Protection System requirements are to address the following. 

 

2.1.1.1.  To provide an automatic as well as manual approach to extinguish fires.  
 
2.1.1.2.  Along with their equipment, Civil Defence Firefighters also utilize the Fire 

Protection Systems installed in the occupancies, to manually fight fires 
thereby protecting the property and lives of people. Thus ensuring the de-
sign of the fire protection system of the building and that its installation is in 
good working condition represents a priority of Civil Defence. 
 

2.1.1.3.  To ensure that the maintenance of Fire Protection systems is carried out pe-

riodically through Civil Defence approved contractors. 

 

2.2.  Fire Protection Concept 

2.2.1.  Fire Protection or Fire Extinguishment can be 
achieved with various techniques and mecha-
nisms. However, the concepts behind all the ex-
tinguishing measures are basically one or more 
of the following.  

 

2.2.1.1.  Physically separate the combustible 

material from the flame.  

 
2.2.1.2.  Removing or Reducing the Oxygen 

supply.  

 
2.2.1.3.  Reducing the temperature of the com-

Did You Know? 

The only type of sprinkler 

designed to extinguish 

fire is the ESFR type 

sprinkler (Early Suppres-

sion Fast Response). 

Other types of sprinklers 

are designed to control 

and restrict the fire 

bustible or the flame. 

spread. 

 
2.2.1.4. 

 

Introducing the chemicals that modify 
the combustion chemistry. 

2.2.2.  The requirements, design criteria, system specifications, inspection and maintenance 
requirements etc. provided in this chapter are minimum guidelines and a code of prac-
tice. It is the consultant’s responsibility to refer to further codes and standards, inter-
national or local as mentioned but not limited to Section 2.2.3., to evaluate the design 
details, the applications of fire protection systems, their suitability, the environmental 
impact and test certifications to comply in full in their design, material specifications, 
installation, inspection and maintenance. 

 
2.2.3. 

International codes and standards referred to for this chapter are NFPA 11, NFPA 12, 
NFPA 13, NFPA 14, NFPA 15, NFPA 16, NFPA 17, NFPA 20, NFPA 22, NFPA 24, NFPA 
25, 30, NFPA 33, NFPA 45, NFPA 75, NFPA 76, NFPA 110, NFPA 750, NFPA 2001, NFPA 
2010,  NFPA Handbook, IBC, IFC, Manufacturer’s design guidelines and installation 
specifications. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 565 of 13482.3.  Types of Fire Protection Systems 

2.3.1.  Fire Protection Systems discussed in this chapter are limited to the Civil Defence 

listed and approved Systems. Any system that is not already listed or registered 
by Civil Defence is not mentioned in this Chapter.  

2.3.2.  Water based Fire Protection Systems 

2.3.2.1.  Dry Riser System (DRS) 
2.3.2.2.  Wet Riser System (WRS)  
2.3.2.3.  Yard Hydrant System (YHS) 
2.3.2.4.  Fire Hose Reel/Rack System (FHS) 
2.3.2.5.  Automatic Sprinkler System (AS) 
2.3.2.6.  Pre-action Sprinkler System (YHS) 
2.3.2.7.  Water Spray System (WSS) 
2.3.2.8.  Water Mist System (WMS) 
2.3.2.9.  Water Deluge System (WDS) 

2.3.3.  Foam and Water based Fire Protection Systems 

2.3.2.1.  Foam Sprinkler System (FSS) 
2.3.2.2.  Foam Monitor System (FMS)  
2.3.2.3.  Foam Injection System (FIS) 
2.3.2.4.  Foam Deluge System (FDS) 
2.3.2.5.  Foam Pouring System (FPS) 
2.3.2.6.  Foam Hand Hose System (FHS) 

 

2.3.4.  Clean Agent based Fire Protection Systems 

2.3.4.1.  Chemical agent  System (CCAS) 
2.3.4.2.  Inert Gas System (ICAS)  

 

2.3.5.  Dry Chemical System (DCS) 
2.3.6.  Wet Chemical System (WCS) 
2.3.7.  Portable Fire Extinguisher (FE) 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 566 of 1348 

3. Details of Fire Protection Systems 
 

3.1.  General Requirements 
 

3.1.1. 

 The general requirements for fire pumps, pipes, fittings, fire water tanks that are 
components of water based fire protection system shall be as per Table 9.3. 

Table 9.3: General Requirements of Water Based Fire Protection Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. FIRE PUMPS 

i.  Fire Pumps shall be restricted to a centrifugal or Horizontal Displacement, single 

stage and multistage pumps of Horizontal or Vertical Turbine shaft type only. 

ii.  Fire pumps shall be dedicated to and listed for fire protection service. 
iii.  All fire pumps, complete with driver, control panel and fuel supply shall be tested 

as an assembly as per Section 6 of this chapter and registered and listed by Civil 
Defence. 

iv.  The fire pump assembly, consisting of Pump, Driver, Controller, Automatic Trans-
fer Switch and Accessories shall perform in accordance with the requirements of 
this Code and the manufacturer's specifications, as an entire unit when installed 
or when components are replaced or when repairs are performed on installed 
system. This “Fire Pump Unit Performance” shall be declared by a single entity as 
having the “Unit Responsibility”. Civil Defence designates the Fire Pump manu-
facturer as such “Unit Responsibility Holder” and the Fire pump manufacturer 
shall declare such unit responsibility in an undertaking and shall be submitted to 
Civil Defence as part of documentation during system commissioning and ac-
ceptance.  

v.  The complete fire pump unit shall be field acceptance tested for proper  and in-

tended performance. 

vi.  The net pump shutoff (churn) pressure plus the maximum static suction pressure, 

adjusted for elevation, shall not exceed the pressure for which the system com-
ponents are rated. 

vii.  A centrifugal fire pump shall be selected to operate at less than or equal to 150 %

of the rated capacity. 

viii. The selection of fire pump shall be such that the pressure in the system it is serv-
ing shall not exceed 24 bar at any point, at any time with fire pump set to cut-off 
at 140% of rated operational pressure. 

ix.  Fire Pumps shall have a permanent steel nameplate clearly showing the name , 

brand, pressure ratings, flow ratings, working temperatures etc. 

x.  All fire pumps shall have a flooded water supply from the dedicated fire water 
tank. Where the flooded positive supply of water to fire pumps is not possible, 
the vertical turbine type fire pumps shall be provided for the negative suction of 
fire water. 

xi.  Please see Chapter 1., Table 1.9.2., for the location and sizes of fire pump rooms. 
xii.   The Fire Pump provided for fire protection shall be a “Set” consisting of 1 Electric 

driven fire pump, 1 diesel driven fire pump and 1 Jockey pump to maintain the 
system pressure, complete with controllers. 

xiii.  The Fire Pump provided at higher levels, other than lowest level, for fire protec-

tion in Superhighrise buildings shall be permitted to be a “Set” consisting of 2 
Electric driven fire pumps, a main and a standby along with 1 Jockey pump to 
maintain the system pressure, complete with controllers. The power supply for 
the permitted 2 electric pumps shall be from different sources. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 567 of 1348 

Table 9.3: General Requirements of Water Based Fire Protection Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. FIRE PUMPS 

xiv.    Diesel Fire Pumps shall have a diesel filtration system to prevent the stagna-

tion and frequent changing of diesel fuel. 

xv.     Fire Pump set shall be located at the lowest level of the system in the build-

ing. However, from lowest level of the building to the ground floor level 
with fire access, is acceptable.  

xvi.    See Chapter 1, Table 1.9.2. for Pump room sizes and construction. 
xvii.   Elbows and tees with a centerline plane parallel to a horizontal split-case 
pump shaft shall only be permitted in the suction line where the distance 
between the flanges of the pump suction intake and the elbow and tee is 
greater than 10 times the suction pipe diameter.  

xviii.  An exclusive, dedicated fire pump test line shall be provided from the 

fire pump discharge header. 

2. ELECTRICAL 

i.  The Primary Power Supply to the main electrical Fire Pump and the Jockey 

POWER SUPPLY 

Pump shall be directly from the power utility company, in a dedicated distribu-
tion board located inside the pump room. 

ii.  Where 2 electrical fire pumps are permitted in accordance with                          
Table 9.3.1.xii., power supply for main electrical pump shall be in accordance 
with Table 9.3.2.i. The power supply to the standby electrical pump shall be 
from separate power source such as building UPS, Diesel generator or alterna-
tive power source. 

iii. Where the fire pump set consists of 1 electrical and 1 diesel fire pump, the die-

sel fire pump shall have 8 hour operating capacity and such diesel fire pump 
shall not be required to have secondary power supply back-up. 

iv. The power supply from the power utility company to fire pumps shall be di-

rectly from the transformer without passing through building distribution 
boards, with only one lockable disconnecting source. See Figure 9.2.a. and Fig-
ure 9.2.b. 

v.  Such disconnecting means shall be remote, separate from the building discon-
necting means, clearly identified with the sign in bold- “Fire Pump Disconnect/
DO NOT SWITCH OFF”. 

vi. The power supply to multiple electrical fire pumps shall be through dedicated 

wiring, separate for each pump.,  

vii. All the wiring from the power utility company to the Fire pump controllers and 

to the pumps shall be 2 hour fire rated in a separate metal conduit. 

viii.All electrical equipment /installation methods shall comply with NFPA 70, Arti-

cle 695. 

3. FIRE PUMP          

i.  Fire pump controllers shall be listed and approved by international testing la-

CONTROLLER 

boratories, certified by international conformity certification bodies and listed 
by Civil Defence. 

ii.  This controllers shall be wired, assembled, programmed, tested, certified and 

ready for immediate installation. 

iii. Controllers shall not be assembled at site. 
iv. Fire pump controller shall have the approved soft starter.  
v.  Fire pump controllers with inbuilt and listed VFD (Variable Frequency 

Drive) shall be permitted. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 568 of 1348 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 569 of 1348 

Table 9.3: General Requirements of Water Based Fire Protection Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

i.  The fire water shall be stored in a permanent “Fire Water Tank” having two compart-
ments or in two interconnected tanks with total effective fire water reserve to cater 
the pumping demand of not less than the duration required by individual systems 
and occupancies as required by other sections of this chapter. 

ii.  Interconnection between water tank compartments shall be with isolation valves, 

such that each compartment is able to be isolated. Such isolation vales shall be 
locked in normally open position. 

iii. Water tank cleaning or maintenance process shall be allowed one compartment at a 
time such that the fire water supply from one compartment shall always be available 
for the fire protection systems. 

iv. The domestic water reserve shall be permitted and preferred to be combined with a 

fire water reserve, to prevent stagnation, provided the fire reserve level is main-
tained at all times. 

v.  Fire water tanks shall be provided with a filling connection directly from the power 

utility company with a float operated valve for an automatic refilling. 

vi. Fire water, where not supplied directly from power utility company, shall be potable 
type or TSE. Where TSE (Tested Sewage Effluent) water is used, it shall be tested and 
certified to be used for fire protection purposes. 

vii. Fire water tanks shall be located and constructed such that the fire pump set gets 

flooded water supply in case of fire pumps are of horizontal centrifugal type.  

viii.The discharge pipe size shall not be less than 6 in. (150 mm) for tanks up to and in-

cluding a 25,000 gal (94.63 m3) capacity and shall not be less than 8 in. (200 mm) for 
capacities of 30,000 gal to 100,000 gal (113.55 m3 to 378.50 m3), or 10 in. (250 mm) 
for greater capacities. 

ix. The fire water tanks shall be provided with drain arrangement, overflow connection, 

access manhole, ladders, level indicators, low level switch, etc. 

x.  An approved water level gauge and indicator shall be installed and interfaced with 

BMS and 24x7 Civil Defence monitoring system. 

xi. See Chapter 1, Table 1.9.3A.  and Table 1.9.3B for Water Tank construction. 

4.  FIRE       
WATER 
TANK 

 
 

Points to Ponder 

During fire emergencies, Civil Defence Personnel refill the Fire water tank from the fire 
tanker as one of their first strategy to ensure adequate water is available to the fire sys-
tems. Without an adequate and efficient drainage arrangement around the fire water tank, 
floor corridors, the basement area, could be flooded with an excess of water that could 
compromise the safety of evacuees, pump room and of the controllers and hamper the 
fire fighting operations. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 570 of 1348 

 
 

ITEMS 

5. DRAINAGE 

6. PIPING 

7. FITTINGS 

Table 9.3: General Requirements of Water Based Fire Protection Systems 

REQUIREMENTS 

i.  The Fire water tank area shall be provided with an adequate drainage facility and 
an arrangement such that over filling tank shall not flood the area and the pump 
room. 

ii.  The pump room and floor corridors shall be provided with a drainage facility to 

drain the dripped and leaked water OR water flooded during firefighting operation. 

i.  The aboveground fire protection Pipes shall be threaded for Lowrise buildings and 
in welded steel for Midrise and Highrise buildings, approved and listed by Civil De-
fence as per test standards mentioned in Section 6. of this chapter. 

ii.  Underground fire protection pipes shall be HDPE (High density Polyethylene), mini-

mum of DR-9 (Dimension Ratio) rating, compatible with the local temperature 
ratings, approved and listed by Civil Defence as per test standards mentioned in 
Section 6. of this chapter. 

iii. Pipes shall be rated for working pressures not less than the maximum pressure it 

serves as per the design and corresponding locations within the system.  

iv. Pipes shall be rated for working temperatures not less than the maximum tempera-

ture statistics of the country terrain. 

v.  Pipe sizes connecting to Fire Pump System shall be as per Table 9.3.a. 

i.  Steel Fittings shall be threaded for Lowrise buildings and in butt welded steel for 
Midrise and Highrise buildings, approved and listed by Civil Defence as per tests 
mentioned in Section 6. of this chapter. 

ii.  The underground piping network fittings shall be HDPE, DR-9, approved and listed 
by Civil Defence as per tests mentioned in Section 6. of this chapter. HDPE fittings 
shall be butt fusion welded as per the manufacturer's instructions. 

iii. Fittings shall be rated for working pressures not less than the maximum pressure it 

serves as per the design and corresponding locations within the system. 

iv. Pipes shall be rated for working temperatures not less than the maximum tempera-

ture statistics of the country terrain. 

v.  Screwed unions shall not be used. 
vi. A one piece reducing fitting shall be used wherever a change is made in the size of 

pipe. 

8.  ATS 

(AUTOMATIC 
TRANSFER 
SWITCH/ 
POWER 
TRANSFER 
SWITCH)  

 
ATS IS NOT 
REQUIRED 
WHERE PUMP 
SET PROVIDED 
IS  
1 ELECTRICAL 
1 DIESEL &  
1 JOCKEY 

i.  Where required, a dedicated ATS (Automatic Transfer Switch) shall be provided in 
the pump room for power transfer from primary supply, power utility company to 
secondary, (diesel generator/UPS) standby power provisions. See Figure 9.2. 

ii.  ATS can be built in as integral part of an approved and fire pump controller or ded-

icated ATS as a separate product.  

iii.  ATS or power transfer from primary source of power to alternate source of power 
to the fire pump shall be essentially located inside the pump room, at or near the 
fire pump controller. 

iv.  Where dedicated ATS is provided, it shall be approved and listed for the fire con-

troller. 

v.  The power transfer switch shall not have short circuit or overcurrent protection as 

part of the switching mechanism of the transfer switch. 

vi.  A means to prevent the sending of the signal for starting of the alternate source 
generator when commanded by the ATS, if the alternate isolating switch or the 
alternate circuit breaker is in the open or tripped position. 

vii. The (ATS) power transfer switch shall be electrically operated and mechanically 

held. 

viii. The power transfer switch shall be suitable for the available short-circuit currents 

at the transfer switch normal and alternate input terminals. 

ix.  The power transfer switch shall have an ampere rating not less than 115 percent of 

the motor full-load current and also be suitable for switching the motor locked 
rotor current. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 571 of 1348 

 

 

 

Figure 9.2.: Various ATS arrangements 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 572 of 1348 
 

 

 

Figure 9.2b.: Typical Power Supply Arrangement from Power Source to Fire Pump Motor 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 573 of 1348 

 
 

Table 9.3.a.: Pipe Sizes Connecting to Centrifugal Fire Pump 

PUMP 
RATING 

SUCTION  DIS-

CHARGE 

RELIEF 
VALVE 

METER 
DEVICE 

RELIEF 
VALVE 
DIS-
CHARGE 

NUMBER/ 
SIZE OF 
HOSE 
VALVES 

HOSE 
HEADER 
SUPPLY 

50 gpm 

38mm  (11/2”)  32mm (11/4”)  32mm (11/4”)  38mm (11/2”)  50mm  (2”) 

1-25mm (1”) 

38mm 
(11/2”) 

100 gpm 

50mm  (2”) 

50mm  (2”) 

38mm (11/2”)  50mm  (2”) 

65mm(21/2”)  1-38mm(11/2”)  65mm
(21/2”) 

150 gpm 

65mm (21/2”)  65mm(21/2”)  50mm  (2”)  65mm(21/2”)  75mm (3”) 

200 gpm 

75mm (3”) 

75mm (3”) 

50mm  (2”)  65mm(21/2”)  75mm (3”) 

1-65mm(21/2”)  65mm
(21/2”) 

1-65mm(21/2”)  65mm
(21/2”) 

250 gpm 

85mm (3 1/2”)  75mm (3”) 

50mm  (2”)  65mm(21/2”)  85mm (31/2”)  1-65mm(21/2”)  75mm 

(3”) 

300 gpm 

100mm (4”)  100mm (4”)  65mm(21/2”)  85mm (31/2”)  85mm (31/2”)  1-65mm(21/2”)  75mm 

(3”) 

400 gpm 

100mm (4”)  100mm (4”)  75mm (3”) 

125mm (5”)  100mm (4”) 

2-65mm(21/2”)  100mm 

(4”) 

450 gpm 

125mm (5”)  125mm (5”)  75mm (3”) 

125mm (5”)  100mm (4”) 

2-65mm(21/2”)  100mm 

(4”) 

500 gpm 

125mm (5”)  125mm (5”)  75mm (3”) 

125mm (5”)  125mm (5”) 

2-65mm(21/2”)  100mm 

(4”) 

750 gpm 

150mm (6”)  150mm (6”)  100mm (4”)  150mm (6”)  125mm (5”) 

3-65mm(21/2”)  150mm 

(6”) 

1000 gpm  200mm (8”)  150mm (6”)  100mm (4”)  200mm (8”)  150mm (6”) 

4-65mm(21/2”)  150mm 

(6”) 

1250 gpm  200mm (8”)  200mm (8”)  150mm (6”)  200mm (8”)  150mm (6”) 

6-65mm(21/2”)  200mm 

(8”) 

1500 gpm  200mm (8”)  200mm (8”)  150mm (6”)  200mm (8”)  200mm (8”) 

6-65mm(21/2”)  200mm 

(8”) 

2000 gpm  250mm (10”)  250mm (10”)  150mm (6”)  250mm (10”)  200mm (8”) 

6-65mm(21/2”)  200mm 

(8”) 

2500 gpm  250mm (10”)  250mm (10”)  150mm (6”)  250mm (10”)  200mm (8”) 

8-65mm(21/2”)  250mm 

3000 gpm  300mm (12”)  300mm (12”)  200mm (8”)  300mm (12”)  200mm (8”) 

12-65mm
(21/2”) 

3500 gpm  300mm (12”)  300mm (12”)  200mm (8”)  300mm (12”)  250mm (10”)  12-65mm

(21/2”) 

4000 gpm  350mm (14”)  300mm (12”)  200mm (8”)  350mm (14”)  250mm (10”)  16-65mm

(21/2”) 

4500 gpm  400mm (16”)  350mm (14”)  200mm (8”)  350mm (14”)  250mm (10”)  16-65mm

(21/2”) 

5000 gpm  400mm (16”)  350mm (14”)  200mm (8”)  350mm (14”)  250mm (10”)  20-65mm

(21/2”) 

 

(10”) 

250mm 
(10”) 

300mm 
(12”) 

300mm 
(12”) 

300mm 
(12”) 

300mm 
(12”) 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 574 of 1348 

Table 9.3: General Requirements of Water based Fire Protection Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

9. ISOLATION 

OR        
SECTION 
CONTROL 
VALVES 

i.  All the isolation and section control valves installed in the sprinkler system shall be  
supervised O.S. & Y gate valve or supervised butterfly valves installed with a tamper 
or supervisory switch connected to the building fire alarm system for monitoring or 
secured in open position by a padlock or riveted strap unless other wise specified 
and approved by the Civil Defence. 

ii.  All isolating valves installed in sprinkler system shall be so constructed that in order 

to shut the valve the spindle must turn clockwise. The hand wheels of all stop 
valves shall be clearly marked to indicate which direction the wheel is to be turned 
to close the valve. 

iii.  An indication showing whether the valve is open or shut shall also be provided. 
iv.  An isolation valves shall be installed in each sprinkler riser on upstream side of an 
alarm check valve such that the isolation of single sprinkler riser will not interrupt 
the water supply to other sprinkler risers from the same source of supply. 

v.  The valve on downstream side of the flow meter in the fire pump test line shall be a 

globe type valve for the ease of throttling. 

vi.  The valves of the suction side of fire pumps and water tank outlets shall be O.S.&Y 

type gate valve only. 

vii.  All the valves shall be rated for the system working pressure and water tempera-

ture service and approved by the Civil Defence department. 

viii. All the isolation / section or floor control valves shall be installed in an easily acces-

sible & visible locations. 

ix.  Isolation and control valves shall be provided with an identification sign board in a 

visible location in both Arabic & English. 

x.  Where isolation / control valves are located in a closed room or shaft, access door 

or panel shall be provided with an identification sign board in visible location in 
both Arabic & English. 

xi.  All the valves shall be rated for the system working pressure and water tempera-

ture service, approved by Civil Defence as per Section 6. of this chapter. 

i.  All the check valves shall be installed in easily accessible & visible locations. 
ii. 

 Where there is more than one source of water supply, a check valve shall be in-
stalled in each connection.  

iii.  Where sprinklers are installed on two adjacent sides of a building, protecting 

against two separate and distinct exposures, with separate control valves for each 
side, the end lines shall be connected with check valves located so that one sprin-
kler around the corner will operate. The intermediate pipe between the two check 
valves shall be arranged to drain.  

iv.  A listed backflow prevention device shall be considered a check valve, and an addi-

tional check valve shall not be required. 

v.  Where cushion tanks are used with automatic fire pumps, no check valve is re-

quired in the cushion tank connection. 

vi.  Check valves shall be installed in a vertical or horizontal position in accordance with 

their listing. 

vii.  Where a single wet pipe sprinkler system is equipped with a fire department con-

nection, the alarm valve is considered a check valve, and an additional check valve 
shall not be required. 

viii. Check valves shall be approved by Civil Defence as per Section 6. of this chapter. 

10. CHECK 
VALVE 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 575 of 1348 

 
 

Table 9.3: General Requirements of Water based Fire Protection Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

11. VALVE       

SUPERVISION 

i.  Valves on connections to water supplies, sectional control and isolation valves, 
and other valves in supply pipes to sprinklers and other fixed water-based fire 
suppression systems shall be supervised by one of the following methods:                            
a. Central station, proprietary, or remote station signalling service                             
b. Local signalling service that will cause the sounding of an audible signal at a 
constantly attended point                                                                                                           
c. Valves locked in the correct position                                                                             
d. Valves located within fenced enclosures under the control of the owner, 
sealed in the open position, and inspected weekly as part of an approved proce-
dure 

12. PRESSURE 

i.  Pressure gauges with a control valve (gauge cock) having drain arrangement 

GAUGE 

shall be installed on the upstream and downstream side of alarm check valves to 
read supply and system pressures. 

ii.  Pressure gauges shall be installed on top of each sprinkler riser and in each zone 

13. BREECHING  

INLET 

control valve assembly. 

iii.  The pressure gauges shall be rated for the system working pressure and water 
temperature service and approved by the Civil Defence department as per Sec-
tion 6. of this chapter. 

iv.  The maximum reading of the scale shall be 150% of the maximum system pres-

sure and each scale shall have divisions not exceeding 0.2bar. 

v.  All the pressure gauges shall be filled with glycerin liquid to prevent damage of 

their needles due to the system water pressure surge.  

i.  A breeching inlet shall be provided for the building active systems. 
ii.  A separate dedicated breeching inlet, located within 18 m of fire truck parking,  
shall be provided directly to fire water tank to refill directly by the Civil Defence 
fire trucks. A signage “FIRE WATER TANK DIRECT REFILLING” shall be provided 
for such a breeching inlet. 

iii.  See Chapter 2, Section 2.10.2. for signage. Signage shall clearly distinguish the 
set feeding the building active systems and the one feeding directly fire water 
tank. 

iv.  A breeching inlet shall be instantaneous male coupling inlets, located at the Fire 

Access level for Civil Defence. Civil Defence breeching inlets shall be located in 
an easily accessible and visible location, especially at the front side of the build-
ings, within 18 meters from the Civil Defence vehicle approach road.  

v.  There shall be no shutoff valve in the fire department connection.  
vi.  Fire department connections shall be located not less than 457 mm nor more 

than 1219 mm above the finished ground level. 

vii.  Breeching inlets shall be equipped with caps to protect the system from the en-

try of dust and debris. 

14. HOSE       
CABINET 

i.  Hose cabinet shall be of a size sufficient to accommodate the corresponding pip-

ing, landing valve, hose, nozzle and extinguishers. 

ii.  Within the cabinet, installation shall be such that there is 25.4 mm space be-

tween any part of the cabinet and landing valve handle, either in closed position 
or open position. 

iii.  Where a fire resistance rated construction is penetrated by a hose cabinet, es-
pecially at fire resistance rated corridors, such fire-resistance rating of the wall 
construction shall be maintained by a fire-resistance rated cabinet and installa-
tion. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 576 of 1348 

Table 9.3: General Requirements of Water based Fire Protection Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

15. HOSE               

iv.   Fire Hose Cabinets shall be located next to the exit doors at ground floor and exit 

CABINET 

stair door at typical floors, in the exit corridor in each floor of the building. 

v.    Where Horizontal Exit is provided in a building, Fire Hose Cabinets shall be in-

stalled on both sides of such horizontal exits. 

vi.   The fire hose cabinet shall not be more than 6 m away from the exit stair door. 
        Additional Fire Hose Cabinets shall be installed in exit corridors of each floor 

such that any part of the building, in each floor is within 30 m from the Fire Hose 
Cabinet. 

vii.  The hose Cabinet shall have signage both in Arabic and English, clearly identifying 

the class of the hose connection. 

16. HOSE 

i.  The hose diameter shall be of size as required by other sections of this chapter as 

per the Hose System classification (Class I, Class II and Class III). 

ii.  The hose length shall be 30 m long, approved and listed by Civil Defence as per 

material test standards mentioned in Section 6. of this chapter. 

17. NOZZLE 

i.  The hose Nozzle diameter shall be of the size as required by other sections of this 

chapter as per the Hose System classification (Class I, Class II and Class III) and 
approved and listed by Civil Defence as per the material test standards men-
tioned in Section 6. of this chapter. 

18. PROTECTION 

i.  Dry & wet riser piping in any building, shall be installed within a protected enclo-

sure having fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours.  

ii.  If the building is fully protected by an automatic sprinkler system, the protection 

of horizontal branches and mains shall not be required. 

19. PAINT     

COLOR 

i.  All steel pipes & fittings used for fire fighting service shall be painted in red color. 
ii.  There shall be directional arrow marks to indicate the direction of water flow in 

the system. See Figure 9.3. 

20. INSTALLER 
QUALIFICA-
TIONS 

i.  The installation of fire protection systems shall be carried out only by Civil De-

fence approved and registered “Fire Protection Contractors”. 

ii.  The installation personnel shall be qualified or shall be supervised by persons who 
are qualified in the installation, inspection and testing of fire protection systems.  
iii. Each installer shall have a Civil Defence’ valid license, which is issued upon his suc-

cessful passing of Civil Defence qualification examinations. 

iv. Qualifications or certification of the personnel and Civil Defence license shall be 

produced at any time when requested by the Civil Defence Authorities.   

 
 

 

Figure 9.3.: Fire Water Flow Directional Signs 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 577 of 1348 

3.2.  Dry Riser Systems 
 

3.2.1. 

 The requirements for Dry Riser System Material, design, installation shall be as per 
Table 9.4. and the General Requirements of Table 9.3.   

 

Table 9.4: Dry Riser System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. DEFINITION 

i.  Dry riser systems are normally dry without a permanent fire pump or water con-
nection to it and depend on the Civil Defence fire truck to pump water into the 
system. Dry riser system comprises of one or multiple vertical riser pipes or hori-
zontal runs of piping that are terminated to the two way breeching inlets locat-
ed at ground level and connected to the 65mm diameter landing (Fire Depart-
ment) valve outlets coupled or uncoupled with 65mm diameter, 30 m long, Civil 
Defence approved hose with multipurpose hose nozzle that are placed inside a 
cabinet for the use of Civil Defence Department personnel or other trained fire 
fighting personnel.  

2. COMPONENTS 

i.  Pipes, fittings, landing valve, hose cabinet, hose , nozzle, breeching inlet and 

signs. 

3. PIPE SIZES 

i.  The minimum pipe size for serving a single 65 mm diameter hose valve shall be 

not less than 65 mm in diameter and the pipe line serving two or more hose 
valves shall be not less than 100 mm diameter.  

ii.  Minimum wall thickness shall be as per schedule 40. 

4. FITTINGS 

i.  Fittings shall comply to Table 9.3.7. 

5. LANDING 

i.  Landing Valves shall be Class I, 65 mm, instantaneous connection outlet, ap-

VALVE 

proved and listed by Civil Defence as per tests mentioned in Section 6. of this 
chapter. 

ii.  The installation of the landing valve shall be such that it is easily accessible and 

operable. 

iii. The landing valve shall be installed at a height of not less than 900  mm and not 

more than 1200 mm from the finished floor level. 

6. FLOW AND           

i.  Landing valves, piping, fittings, breeching inlet and connections shall designed to 

PRESSURE 

withstand 250 gpm at 6.9 bar. 

ii.  If the residual pressure exceeds 7 bar at the fire hose connection, an approved 

pressure reducing valve shall be introduced to restrict the pressure to 7 bar.  

7. HOSE 

i.  Hose shall be 65 mm, 30 m long, approved and listed by Civil Defence as per 

material test standards mentioned in Section 6. of this chapter. 

8. HOSE CABINET 

i.  The hose Cabinet shall comply to Table 9.3.14. 

9. NOZZLE 

i.  The nozzle shall comply to Table 9.3.17. 

10. SIGNAGE 

i.  The hose Cabinet shall have signage both in Arabic and English, clearly identify-

ing the class and type of the hose connection as “Dry Riser System” 

11. LOCATION 

i.  The hose Cabinet location shall comply to Table 9.3.14. 

12. BREECHING 

INLET 

i.  The dry riser stand pipe system shall be terminated to a 2-way breeching inlet 
connection having 100 mm diameter flanged outlet with 2 no's of 65 mm diam-
eter instantaneous male coupling inlets 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 578 of 1348 

 

 

Figure 9.4.: Dry Landing valve riser with Hose reel System 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 579 of 1348 

3.3.  Hose Reel Systems 

 
3.2.1. 

 

 

 The requirements for Hose Reel System material, design, installation shall be as 
per Table 9.5. and the General Requirements of Table 9.3.   

Table 9.5: Fire Hose Reel System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. DEFINITION 

i.  Fire hose reel systems are Class II systems, pressurized with water having a per-

manent water supply from fire water pumps and fire water storage tanks. The fire 
hose reel system comprises of one or multiple vertical riser pipes or horizontal 
runs of piping that are connected to the 25 mm diameter outlet valve, 30 m long 
re-in forced rubber lined (RRL) hose with hose nozzle that are placed inside the 
fire hose cabinet for the use of trained fire fighting personnel or by occupants as 
first response if it is safe to do so. 

ii.  Fire hose rack systems are class II systems, pressurized with water having perma-
nent water supply from fire water pumps and fire water storage tanks. Fire hose 
rack system comprises of one or multiple vertical riser pipes or horizontal runs of 
piping that are connected to the 40 mm diameter outlet valve, 30 m long fire 
hose, folded vertically and attached over the pins in an approved manner. The 
system is for the use of trained fire fighting personnel or by occupants as first re-
sponse if it is safe to do so. 

2. COMPONENTS 

i.  Fire Pumps, Controller, Fire Water Tank, Pipes, Fittings, outlet valve, Hose Cabi-

net, Hose Reel/Hose Rack , Nozzle, Breeching inlet and Signs. 

3. FIRE PUMP 
CAPACITY 

i.  The fire pump set shall consist of 1 Electric driven pump and 1 diesel driven pump 

complete with controllers. 

ii.  Pump capacities shall comply with Section 4. in accordance with the occupancy 

4. PIPES 

type. 

iii. Pump pressure shall be such that the most remote Hose Reel or Hose Rack pres-

sure shall not be less than 4.5 bar. 

i.  The minimum pipe size for serving a single fire hose reel shall not be less than 25 
mm diameter, and serving single hose rack shall not be less than 40 mm and the 
pipe line serving two or more hose connections shall not be less than 50 mm in 
diameter. 

ii.  The minimum wall thickness shall be as per schedule 40. 
iii. Pipes shall be rated a for working pressure of 4.5 bar at the most remote point of 

the piping network. 

5. FITTINGS 

i.  Fittings shall be rated for working pressure of 4.5 bar at the most remote point of 

the piping network. 

6. VALVE OUTLET  i.  The Valve outlet shall be 25 mm for the hose Reel System. 
ii.  The valve outlet shall be 40 mm for the hose Rack System. 

7. HOSE 

i.  The hose for the hose reel system shall be 25 mm in diameter, 30 m long re-

inforced rubber lined (RRL) hose with hose nozzle , wrapped on a rotating drum. 

ii.  The hose for the hose rack system shall be 40 mm in diameter, 30 m long fire 

hose, folded vertically. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 580 of 1348 

 

Table 9.5: Fire Hose Reel System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

8. HOSE CABINET 

i.  The hose cabinet shall comply with Table 9.3.14. 

9. NOZZLE 

i.  The nozzle shall comply to Table 9.3.17. 

10. SIGNAGE 

i.  The hose Cabinet shall have a signage both in Arabic and English, clearly identify-

ing the class and type of the hose connection as “Fire Hose Reel/Rack System” 

11. LOCATION 

i.  The hose Cabinet location shall comply with Table 9.3.12. 

12. FIRE WATER 

i.  Fire water tanks shall comply with Table 9.3.4., with the duration as per Section 

TANK. 

4. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Figure 9.5.a.: Typical Class III Wet Hose Reel 

Figure 9.5.b.: Typical Dry landing valve with wet Hose Reel 

3.2.2.  Generally, the fire hose reel/rack system is accompanied by a dry riser system, 

where the hose cabinet houses both hose reel/racks and landing valves as shown 
below.  Such systems shall comply both with Section 3.2. and Section 3.3..  

Figure 9.5.c.: Class II Hose Reel Tapping without landing valve 

Figure 9.6.: Typical Combined Hose Cabinet 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 581 of 1348 

3.4.  Wet Riser Systems 

 
3.4.1. 

 The requirements for the Wet Riser System material, design, installation shall be 
as per Table 9.6. and the General Requirements of Table 9.3.   

Table 9.6: Wet Riser System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. DEFINITION 

i.  Wet riser systems are pressurized with water having a permanent water supply 
from fire water pumps and fire water storage tanks. The wet riser system com-
prises of one or multiple vertical riser pipes or horizontal runs of piping that feed 
the Landing Valve connections. These risers are connected to fire pumps and fire 
water storage tanks located within the buildings. A 25mm diameter for Hose Reel 
System OR 40 mm diameter for Hose Rack system AND, 65 mm diameter for the 
landing Valve tapping will be made from the wet riser in each floor level and 
fitted with multipurpose hoses and nozzles that are placed inside a cabinet, 
known as Class III hose systems, for the use of the Civil Defence department per-
sonnel or other trained fire fighting personnel. In addition four way breeching 
inlets located at a ground level are connected to the bottom of the wet riser to 
pump water from the Civil Defence fire truck as supplementary water supply. 

2. COMPONENTS 

i.  Fire Pumps, Controller, Fire Water Tank, Pipes, Fittings, Hose connection valve, 

Landing Valve, Hose Cabinet, Hose Reel/Hose Rack , Hose, Nozzle, Breeching inlet 
and Signs. 

3. FIRE PUMP 
CAPACITY 

i.  The fire pump set shall consist of 1 Electric driven pump, 1 diesel driven pump 

and 1 electric Jockey pump, complete with controllers. 

ii.  The fire Pump capacities shall comply with Section 4. 
iii. Pump pressure shall be such that the most remote landing valve pressure shall 

not be less than 6.9 bar. 

4. PIPES 

i.  The minimum pipe size for serving a single 65 mm diameter hose valve shall be 

not less than 65 mm in diameter and the pipe line serving two or more hose 
valves shall be not less than 100 mm diameter.  

ii.  The minimum wall thickness shall be as per schedule 40. 
iii. Pipes shall be rated for working pressure of 6.9 bar at the most remote point of 

the piping network. 

iv. 25 mm Hose reel or 40 mm Hose rack and 65 mm Landing valve tapping shall be 

made from the same wet riser. 

5. FITTINGS 

i.  Fittings shall be rated for a working pressure of 6.9 bar at the most remote point 

of the piping network. 

6. HYDRAULIC 

i.  The hydraulic calculation shall be performed using the Civil Defence listed and 

CALCULA-
TIONS 

approved software based on the following criteria.                                                                                       
a. Two numbers of landing valves on top most point of the hydraulically most 
unfavorable wet riser providing 250 gpm flow at 7 bar per outlet and one Land-
ing valve outlet on the topmost point of the adjacent wet risers providing 250 
gpm flow at 7 bar per outlet. 

ii.  If a horizontal wet riser system provides supply for 3 or more landing valve out-
lets in a floor, the hydraulic calculation shall be based on 3 numbers of landing 
valve at remotest point of the  hydraulically most unfavorable wet riser pipe 
providing 250 gpm flow at 7 bar per outlet and one landing valve outlet at the 
topmost point of each adjacent wet riser pipes providing 250 gpm flow at 7 bar 
per outlet. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 582 of 1348 

Table 9.6: Wet Riser System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

7. VALVE  OUTLET 

i.  The valve outlet shall be 25 mm for the hose Reel System. 
ii.  The  valve outlet shall be 40 mm for the hose Rack System. 
iii. The valve outlet shall be 65 mm for the landing Valve. 

8. HOSE 

i.  The hose for the hose reel system shall be 25 mm diameter, 30 m long with a 

hose nozzle , wrapped on a rotating drum. 

ii.  The hose for the hose rack system shall be 40 mm diameter outlet valve, 30 m 

long fire hose, folded vertically. 

iii. The hose for landing valve shall be 65 mm in diameter and 30 m long re-inforced 

rubber lined (RRL) hose with multipurpose nozzle. 

9. LOCATION 

i.  Fire Hose Cabinets (FHC) shall be within 6 m from Exit Stair door. FHC shall not 
be located inside the stair core. Installation of landing valve alone in the stair is 
not permitted as an alternative to the fire hose cabinet.  

ii.  Fire Hose Cabinets shall consist of the following. 
a.  65 mm Landing Valve  outlet. 
b.  40/25 mm outlet with Hose Reel/Hose Rack. 
c.  CO2 Fire Extinguisher.  
d.  Dry Chemical Powder Fire Extinguisher. 
e.  65mm, 30 m Fire Hose with  nozzle. 
iii.  The hose Cabinet location shall comply with Table 9.3.14. See Figure 9.7. 

 

 

 

Figure 9.7.: Hose Cabinet Locations  

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 583 of 1348 

Table 9.6: Wet Riser System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

10. NOZZLE 

i.  The nozzle shall comply with Table 9.3.17. 

11. SIGNAGE 

i.  The hose Cabinet shall have signage both in Arabic and English, clearly identify-
ing the class and type of the hose connection as “Fire Hose Reel/Rack System” 

12. BREECHING 

i.  A 4-way breeching inlet connection having 150 mm diameter flanged outlet with 

INLET 

4 no's of 65 mm diameter instantaneous male coupling inlets shall be provid-
ed. 

ii.  Breeching inlets shall also comply with requirements of Table 9.3.13. 

13. ZONING OF  
WET RISERS 
(MULTI-
LEVELS) 

i.  The maximum pressure anywhere  in the wet riser system shall not exceed 24 
bar with a fire pump set to cut-off at 140% of the rated operational pressure. 
ii.  Where multiple wet risers are provided in other than Lowrise buildings, they 

shall be interconnected at the highest level they are serving. 

14. TEST RISERS 
AND DRAINS 

iii. The vertical wet riser system pressure exceeds 12 bar with a fire pump set to cut

-off at 140% of the rated operational pressure., or when most remote landing 
valve is located at a height 45 m from the fire pump location, the risers shall be 
zoned into “High Zone” and “Low Zone” with looping as shown in Figure 9.8.B. 
iv. When the vertical wet riser system pressure exceeds 24 bar with fire pump set 
to cut-off at 140% of the rated operational pressure., or when the most remote 
landing valve is located at a height of 90 m from the fire pump location, the se-
cond set of fire pumps and dedicated water tanks shall be provided to feed such 
wet risers from that level. See Figure 9.9.A. and Figure 9.9.B. for illustration. 

i.  Each wet riser shall have drainage arrangement, at least on every alternative 

floors. 

ii.  Drain risers shall be fitted with 65 mm diameter instantaneous male coupling 

with a built-in spring loaded non return valve with a blank cap beside each land-
ing valve outlet to facilitate the landing valve test during the routine testing.  

iii. The drain riser shall be terminated back to the fire water tank or to open drain. 
iv. Each wet riser shall be provided with drain arrangements having not less than 50 

mm diameter on the down stream side of the riser isolation valve and where 
ever the riser pipe changes its direction which leaves water trapped in those  
sections. 

15. FIRE WATER 

i.  Fire water tanks shall comply with Table 9.3.3., with duration as per Section 4. 

TANK. 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 584 of 1348 
 

 

 

Figure 9.8.:A.: Typical Wet Riser System  

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 585 of 1348 
 

 

 

Figure 9.8.B.: Typical Wet Riser System with High Zone and Low 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 586 of 1348 

 

Figure 9.9.A.: Multi-level pump and water tank for Wet Riser System 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 587 of 1348 
 

 

 

Figure 9.9.B.: Multi-level pump and water tank for Wet Riser System 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 588 of 1348 

3.5.  Automatic Wet Sprinkler Systems 

 
3.5.1. 

 

 

 The requirements for Automatic Sprinkler System material, design, installation 
shall be as per Table 9.7. and the General Requirements of Table 9.3.   

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. DEFINITION 

i.  Automatic sprinkler heads are individually heat activated and fixed into a piping 
network with water under pressure. When the heat of a fire raises the sprinkler 
temperature to its operating point, (a variety of temperature ratings, from 57 to 
260 degrees) a liquid- filled glass bulb will shatter or a solder link will melt to 
open that single sprinkler, allowing water to discharge. The water is directed 
onto a diffuser or deflector which is designed to not only break the water into 
droplets of a specific size, but also to direct the spray to cover a specific floor 
and wall area. 

2. COMPONENTS 

i.  The Fire Pumps, Controller, Fire Water Tank, Pipes, Fittings,  Sprinkler Heads, 

Isolation valves, Alarm Check valves (ACV), Floor Zone Control Valve (ZCV), Pres-
sure gauge, Flow Switch, Test connection, Drains, Breeching inlet and Signs. 

3. FIRE PUMP   

CAPACITY 

4. PIPES 

i.  The Fire Pump set shall consist of 1 Electric driven pump, 1 diesel driven pump 

and 1 electric Jockey pump, complete with controllers. 

ii.  The Pump capacity shall be as per Section 4. 

i.  Pipe sizes for the automatic sprinkler System shall be established using Hydrau-
lic calculations but shall not be less than the minimum diameters mentioned in 
Table 9.7.A. 

ii.  However, the number of sprinklers shall be permitted to be increased when ac-

ceptable hydraulic calculations are performed and justified. 

iii. The minimum wall thickness shall be as per schedule 40. 
iv. Pipes shall be rated for a working pressure of 12 bar at the most remote point of 

the piping network. 

v.  The sprinkler Piping shall be dedicated, serving only a sprinkler system. 
vi. Sprinkler pipes shall be supported in such a way that it allows free movement 
due to the expansion and contraction and the supports shall be installed near 
the joints, elbows and tee branches as much as possible.  

vii. The required special expansion joints & expansion loops shall be provided to 

allow the free movement of the pipe installation due to the expansion and con-
traction of the building structure and of the piping. 

Table 9.7.A: Minimum Pipe Sizes and Maximum Number of Sprinkler allowed 

NOMINAL STEEL 
PIPE  DIAMETER 

MAXIMUM NUMBER OF 
SPRINKLERS IN LIGHT 
HAZARD 

MAXIMUM NUMBER OF 
SPRINKLERS IN             
ORDINARY AND STORAGE 
HAZARD 

MAXIMUM NUMBER OF 
SPRINKLERS IN ABOVE 
FALSE CEILING AND   BE-
LOW RAISED FLOOR 

1. 25 mm  

2. 32 mm  

3. 40 mm  

4. 50 mm  

5. 65 mm  

6. 80 mm  

7. 100 mm  

8. 150 mm  

 

2 

3 

5 

10 

30 

60 

100 

230 

2 

3 

5 

10 

20 

40 

100 

275 

2 

4 

7 

15 

30 

60 

100 

300 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 589 of 1348 

 

 

ITEMS 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

REQUIREMENTS 

5. FITTINGS 

i.  Fittings shall be rated for a working pressure of 12 bar at the most remote point 

of the piping network. 

6. SPRINKLERS 

i.  All sprinklers shall be permanently marked with a one- or two-character manu-
facturer symbol, followed by three or four numbers, so as to identify a unique 
sprinkler identification for every change in orifice size or shape, deflector charac-
teristic, pressure rating, and thermal sensitivity.  

ii.  Spare sprinklers not less than six numbers in quantity in each type & tempera-

ture range installed within the building shall be kept maintained in stock within 
the premises  

7. CORROSION 
RESISTANT 

i.  Listed corrosion-resistant sprinklers shall be installed in locations where chemi-

cals, moisture, or other corrosive vapors sufficient to cause corrosion of such 
devices exist. 

8. PAINT/  COLOR 

i.  Sprinklers shall not be painted unless they are listed and approved with paint 

from the manufacturer.  

9. COVER PLATES 

i.  Cover plates and Escutcheons used with recessed/flush-type or concealed sprin-

klers shall be part of the listed sprinkler assembly. 

10. K-FACTORS 

i.  Standard sprinklers shall have the thread size of not less than ½ in. (12.7 mm) 

NPT having nominal orifice size of ½ in. (12.7 mm) with K-factor 5.6 (Metric fac-
tor 80).  

ii.  Sprinklers having a K-factor exceeding K-5.6 (80) and having ½ in. (15 mm) NPT 

shall not be permitted to be installed in new sprinkler systems. 

iii. Where design density required is greater than 8.1 LPM/m2 (2.1 gpm/m2 ) but 

lesser than 13.9 LPM/m2 (3.7 gpm/m2 ), the sprinklers having K-factor 8.0 
(Metric factor K-116) shall be used.  

iv. If the required design density is greater than 13.9 LPM/m2 (3.7 GPM/m2), the 
sprinklers having K-factor 11.2 (Metric factor K-161) or higher shall be used as 
per the approval listing. 

11.  OPERATING 
PRESSURE 

i.  The minimum operating pressure of any sprinkler for determining the water 

supply requirements  shall be not less than 0.5 bar (7 psi) in the light hazard oc-
cupancy and 1.0 bar (14.5 psi) in the ordinary hazard occupancies. 

ii.  The maximum operating pressure in a sprinkler system shall not be more than 

12 bar.  

iii. Where a higher operating pressure is used for the sprinkler system, all the sprin-

klers, pipes and fittings shall be rated, approved and listed by Civil Defence for 
the higher operating pressure. However, the operating pressure shall not be 
more than 16 bar in any case. 

12.  PIPING 

i.  Pipe sizes for an automatic sprinkler system shall be established using Hydraulic 

calculations but shall not be less than the minimum diameters mentioned in          
Table 9.7.4. 

ii.  The minimum wall thickness shall be as per schedule 40. 
iii. The pipes shall be rated for a working pressure of 12 bar at the most remote 

point of the piping network. 

iv. Sprinkler Piping shall be dedicated, serving only sprinkler system. 
v.  It shall be permitted to provide minimum 25 mm (1 inch) outlets with hexagonal 

bushings to accommodate sprinklers attached directly to branch line fittings to 
allow for future system modifications. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 590 of 1348 

 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

13.  DESIGN        

i.  The water supply requirement for sprinklers only shall be calculated from the den-

DENSITY 

sity/area curves shown in Figure 9.10. 

ii.  The hand line hose stream water demand shall be added to the sprinkler water 

demand according to the type of proposed fire fighting hose system based on the 
occupancy classification. 

iii.  The calculations shall satisfy any single point on the appropriate density/area 

curve. 

iv. The design Density based on the Hazard categories and Density—Area curve on a 

single design point shall be as per Table 9.7.B. 

Table 9.7.B.: Design Densities based on Occupancy Hazard 

HAZARD 

DESIGN DENSITY         
(mm/min) gpm/ft2 
      

AREA OF OPERATION 
( m2 ) Ft2 

WATER DEMAND       
ONLY FOR SPRINKLERS 
gpm 

1. Light Hazard  

2. Ordinary 1 Hazard  

3. Ordinary 2 Hazard  

(4.1) 0.10  

(6.1) 0.15  

(8.1) 0.20  

4. Extra Hazard Group 1  

(12.2) 0.30  

5. Extra Hazard Group 2 

(16.3) 0.40  

(139) 1500 

(139) 1500 

(139) 1500 

(232) 2500 

(232) 2500 

150 

225 

300 

750 

1000 

 

Photo Caption 
 

 

Figure 9.10.: Density– Area Curves 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 591 of 1348 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

14. SPRINKLER   

OPERATING    
TEMPERATURE 

i.  The operating temperature of the proposed sprinklers shall be based on the 
maximum room temperature expected at the ceiling level at any time. Auto-
matic sprinklers shall have their frame arms, deflector, coating material, or liq-
uid bulb colored in accordance with the requirements of Table 9.7.C. 

ii.  The maximum temperature of water in the sprinkler piping shall not exceed 

37.8oC. 

iii. The minimum temperature of water in the sprinkler piping shall not drop be-

low 4oC. 

iv. For the air-conditioned areas, the operating temperature of the sprinkler shall 

be 68oC. 

v.  For the non air-conditioned areas, the operating temperature of the sprinkler 

shall be 79oC. 

Table 9.7.C: Sprinkler Operating Temperature and Color Classification 

MAXIMUM  CEILING           
TEMPERATURE 

TEMPERATURE 
RATING OF    
SPRINKLER HEAD 

TEMPERATURE            
CLASSIFICATION 

COLOUR CODE 

GLASS BULB  
COLOURS 

1. 38OC  

2. 66OC  

3. 107OC  

4. 149OC  

5. 191OC  

6. 246OC  

7. 329OC  

 

 

57OC—77OC  

79OC—107OC  

Ordinary 

Uncolored or Black 

Orange or Red 

Intermediate 

White 

Yellow or Green 

121OC—149OC  

High 

163OC—191OC  

Extra High 

Blue 

Red 

204OC—246OC  

260OC—302OC  

343OC  

Very Extra High 

Green 

Ultra High 

Ultra High 

Orange 

Orange 

Blue 

Purple 

Black 

Black 

Black 

Figure 9.11.: Sprinkler Bulb Color codes and Marking for illustration 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 592 of 1348 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

15. INSPECTOR 

i.  An approved alarm test valve shall be provided in each sectional or floor zone con-

TEST 
VALVE 

trol valve assembly on the downstream side of the water flow switch. The test valve 
shall be not less than 25 mm of diameter in size and shall have an orifice diameter 
to give a flow equal to or less than one sprinkler of a type having the smallest ori-
fice installed on the particular system to test each water flow alarm device for each 
system.  

ii.  The inspectors test valve shall be located at an easily accessible & visible location 

with an identification sign board in a visible location in both Arabic & English. 

iii. Where the test valve is located in a closed room, shaft access door or panel, it shall 

be provided with an identification sign board in a visible location in both Arabic & 
English. 

16. DRAINS 

i.  The complete sprinkler system piping shall be designed and installed in such a way 

that the entire water can be drained. 

ii.  A main drain valve shall be installed on each sprinkler system main riser on the 

down stream side of an Alarm Check valve. The system main drain valve can be a 
part of an alarm check valve.  

iii. The size of the main drain valve (alarm check valve) shall not be less than 50mm in  
diameter. Auxiliary drains shall be provided where a change in piping direction pre-
vents the drainage of the system piping through the main drain valve. 

iv. In addition, where the sectional zone or floor control valve is provided, it shall be 
equipped with a drain connection having a minimum size not less than 25 mm in 
diameter to drain that portion of the system controlled by the sectional valve. A 
listed and approved combined test & drain valve is permitted to be used in the sec-
tional or floor zone control valve assembly.  

v.  The main sprinkler riser drain should discharge to an open drain outside the build-

ing at a point free from the possibility of causing water damage. Where it is not 
possible to discharge the building wall outside, the drain should be piped to a 
sump, which in turn should discharge by gravity or be pumped to a waste water 
drain or sewer. The main sprinkler riser drain connection should be of a size suffi-
cient to carry off water from the fully open drain valve while it is discharging under 
normal water system pressures. Where this is not possible, a supplementary drain 
of equal size should be provided for test purposes with free discharge, located at or 
above grade. 

vi. The drain riser may be permitted to terminate back to the fire water tank if the 
tanks do not serves for domestic use. In such case, the drain discharge shall con-
form to any health or water department regulations.  

 

 

Figure 9.12.: Acceptable and unacceptable Pressure gauge location 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 593 of 1348 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

17. ALARM 
CHECK 
VALVE 

i.  An Alarm check valve assembly shall be installed in each sprinkler system riser as 
per the maximum sprinkler protection zone area limitations as per Table 9.7.17.ii, 
which shall consists of the following equipment and accessories.                                                                   
a. An alarm check Valve complete with trim kits & retarding device.                               
b. A water Motor Alarm Gong.                                                                                               
c. An electric Alarm pressure switch.                                                                                        
d. Pressure Gauges (Upstream & Down stream) 

ii.  Maximum sprinkler zone limitation                                                                                                       

a. Light Hazard—4831 m2                                                                                                                                                                          
b. Ordinary Group 1—4831 m2                                                                                                                
c. Ordinary Group 2—4831 m2                                                                                                               
d. Extra Hazard Group 1– 3716 m2                                                                                                         
e. Extra Hazard Group 2– 3716 m2 

iii. The alarm valve shall be installed in each sprinkler system supply risers complete 

with the required trims in all sprinkler system installations.  

iv. The Alarm valve trims shall consist of a basic trim with all the required pipes, 

fitting & valves, water motor alarm gong, retard chamber, electric alarm pressure 
switch, upstream & down stream pressure gauges etc.  

v.  The alarm pressure switch shall be interconnected with the building fire alarm sys-

tem to activate the fire alarm. 

vi. A 20 mm diameter by pass line shall be provided connecting the upstream and 
downstream side of the alarm check to allow the water pressure surge with out 
lifting the valve clapper off its seat, which will prevent the false alarm. 

vii. Alarm check valves shall be rated for the system working pressure and water tem-

perature service and approved by the Civil Defence department. 

viii.All the check valves shall be installed in easily accessible & visible locations.  
ix. Alarm check valves shall be installed vertically with an adequate clearance space 

around it for testing and maintenance purposes. 

x.  Retarding device shall be installed in the alarm line to prevent the false alarm due 

to the water pressure fluctuation in the sprinkler system. 

xi. The alarm check valve shall be approved and listed with the Civil Defence as per 

test standards of Section 6. 

 
 

 

Figure 9.13.: Alarm Check Valve  

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 594 of 1348 

 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

18. WATER     

MOTOR 
ALARM 
GONG 

i.  The sprinkler system shall be fitted with an approved water motor alarm, which 
shall be located at a distance not exceeding 25 m from the alarm valve, and at a 
height not to exceed 6m above the alarm valve. 

ii.  The used pipe work and fittings used shall be galvanized and to the sizes deter-

mined by the manufacturers data sheet. 

iii. The pipe work shall be arranged to drain through a fitting having an orifice not 
exceeding 3 mm in diameter. The orifice plate may form an integral part of the 
fitting but shall be manufactured from a non-ferrous material to prevent the hole 
from becoming blocked by corrosion or foreign matter. 

iv. A 15 mm test valve shall be installed on the installation side of each alarm valve. 
v.  Approved identification signs, shall be provided for the outside alarm devices. The 
sign should be located near the device in a conspicuous position and should be in 
English and Arabic. 

i.  Electric alarm pressure switches shall be installed in the system and they shall be 

mounted on a vertical branch pipe at least 300 mm long. 

ii.  The pressure switch may be of diaphragm bellows or bourdon tube operated type, 

and shall be sufficiently sensitive to operate when only one sprinkler is discharg-
ing.  

iii. The pressure switch shall be provided with volt free contracts to interconnect with 

the building fire alarm system for monitoring. 

iv. The pressure switch shall be rated for the system working pressure and water 

temperature service and approved by the Civil Defence department. 

19. ELECTRIC 
ALARM   
PRESSURE 
SWITCH 

 

 

Figure 9.14.: Water Motor Gong Connection 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 595 of 1348 

 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

20. CONTROL 

i.  Each sprinkler system shall be provided with a listed indicating valve in an accessi-

VALVES 

ble location, so located as to control all automatic sources of water supply. 

ii.  At least one listed indicating valve shall be installed in each source of water supply 
but not for fire department connections. There shall be no shutoff valve in the fire 
department connection. 

 

Figure 9.15.: Acceptable Isolation Valve arrangements 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 596 of 1348 

 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

21. PRESSURE      

i.  In portions of systems where all components are not listed for pressure greater 

REDUCING 
VALVE        
(PRV STATION) 

than 12.1 bar and the potential exists for normal (non-fire condition) water 
pressure in excess of 12.1 bar, a listed pressure-reducing valve shall be installed 
and set for an outlet pressure not exceeding 11 bar at the maximum inlet pres-
sure. 

ii.  Pressure gauges shall be installed on the inlet and outlet sides of each pressure-

reducing valve. 

iii. A relief valve of not less than 13 mm in size shall be provided on the discharge 
side of the pressure-reducing valve set to operate at a pressure not exceeding 
12.1 bar. 

iv. A listed indicating valve shall be provided on the inlet side of each pressure-
reducing valve, unless the pressure-reducing valve meets the listing require-
ments for use as an indicating valve. 

v.  Means shall be provided downstream of all pressure-reducing valves for flow 

tests at sprinkler system demand. 

vi. Pressure reducing valve shall be a valve station in an assembly with redundan-

cy.  

vii. Pressure relief valve shall not be used as pressure reducing valve. 

 

 

Figure 9.16.: Pressure Reducing Station 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 597 of 1348 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

22. SECTION OR 

i.  A sectional or floor zone control valve (ZCV) assembly shall be installed where the 

FLOOR 
ZONE    
CONTROL 
VALVE (ZCV) 

tapping is taken from the sprinkler riser for each floor in multi-story buildings. 

ii.  All Highrise buildings shall be provided with a motorized Zone Control Valve, su-

pervised by a zone control valve control panel for annunciation and manual opera-
tion by Civil Defence, to control, activate or de-activate the desired floor sprinkler. 
The zone control valve control panel shall be located at the Fire Command Center, 
next to the main Fire detection and Alarm control panel or at the fire pump room. 
iii. ZCV shall have supervised Butterfly valve, fitted with an indicator showing “OPEN” 

and “CLOSE” positions, and complete with padlocked securing straps. The valve 
shall be mounted on the upstream side of the flow switch. 

iv. ZCV shall have a water flow alarm switch having paddle type water flow detector 

suitable for the size of the pipe in which it is installed shall be fixed after the 
butterfly valve, on the main supply pipe and before any sprinkler connection is 
taken off. 

v.  ZCV shall have an inspector test and drain connections having not less than 25 mm 

diameter shall be installed on downstream side of flow switch. 

vi. ZCV shall have dial pressure gauges suitable for the water pressures that shall be 

fitted so that they can be easily removed for testing and checking without shutting 
down the water supply. Pressure gauge shall be installed between the butterfly 
valve and the water flow switch. 

vii. The minimum distance between the water flow switch and the butterfly valve and 

the test & drain valve shall be not less than 600 mm. 

viii.The water flow switch shall be mounted on the top of the pipe or as recommend-

ed by the original equipment manufactures data sheet. 

ix. All the equipment of ZCV assembly shall be rated for the system working pressure 
and water temperature service and approved by the Civil Defence department as 
per Section 6. 

x.  The ZCV assembly shall be installed in an easily accessible & visible locations, pref-

erably inside the star enclosure above the required headroom height.  

xi. ZCV assembly shall be provided with an identification sign board in a visible loca-

tion in both Arabic & English languages. 

xii. Where the ZCV assembly is located in a closed room or shaft, the access door or 

panel shall be provided with an identification sign board in visible location in both 
Arabic & English. 

 

 

Figure 9.17.: Zone Control Valve 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 598 of 1348 

 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

23. HYDRAULIC 

i.  The sprinkler design with Computerized Hydraulic calculations shall be provided 

CALCULATIONS 

to determine the fire water demand, pressure and pipe sizes required for a 
sprinkler system. 

ii.  The hydraulic calculation shall be performed using the Civil Defence listed and 

approved software. The following criteria shall be used for Hydraulic calcula-
tions. 

iii. Hydraulics bases shall be an occupancy hazard that is located to the farthest 

point or the top most of the source of fire water supply system within the occu-
pancy or density of discharge required according to the preset values as per 
occupancy classification. 

 

 

Figure 9.18.: Typical Standard Sprinkler System Network 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 599 of 1348 

 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

24. SPRINKLER 

ZONING AND 
AREA         
LIMITATIONS 

i.  The maximum floor area on any one floor to be protected by sprinklers supplied 
by any one sprinkler system riser or combined system riser shall be 4831 m2 for 
Light and Ordinary Hazard. Separate Alarm Check Valve (ACV) shall be used for 
each 4831 m2 sprinkler zones in light and ordinary hazards.. 

ii.  The maximum floor area on any one floor to be protected by sprinklers supplied 
by any one sprinkler system riser or combined system riser shall be 3720 m2 for 
Extra Hazard and Storage occupancies. Separate Alarm Check Valve (ACV) shall 
be used for each 3720 m2 sprinkler zones in extra hazards.. 

iii. The floor area occupied by mezzanines shall not be included in the area limits. 

25. PROTECTION 

i. 

AREA PER 
SPRINKLER 

 The protection area of coverage per sprinkler (As) shall be determined as S X L, 
As=S x L. 
a.  Where S is along the branch line, the distance between sprinklers (or to wall 
or obstruction in the case of the end sprinkler on the branch line) upstream 
and downstream. Choose the larger of either twice the distance to the wall 
or the distance to the next sprinkler on the same branch. 

b.  Where L is between the branch lines, perpendicular distance to the sprinkler 
on the adjacent branch line (or to a wall or obstruction in the case of the last 
branch line) on each side of the branch line on which the subject sprinkler is 
positioned. Choose the larger of either twice the distance to the wall or ob-
struction or the distance to the next sprinkler on the adjacent branch. 

 

 

Figure 9.19.: Protection Area per Sprinkler Head, As=SxL. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 600 of 1348 

 

 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

26.  PROTECTION 
AREA AND   
SPACING 

i.  The protection areas and the maximum spacing of various sprinkler heads, with a 
lenient consideration, shall comply with Table 9.7.F. unless the hazard demands 
a reduction in these figures. 

ii.  The distance from sprinklers to walls shall not exceed one-half of the allowable 

distance between sprinklers. 

iii. Under curved surfaces, the horizontal distance shall be measured at the floor 

level from the wall, or at the intersection of the curved surface and the floor to 
the nearest sprinkler shall not be greater than one-half the allowable distance 
between sprinklers. 

iv. The distance between sprinklers shall not be less than 1.8 m on center. 

27. STANDARD 

PENDENT 
AND           
UPRIGHT 
SPRINKLERS 

i.  The upright sprinkler heads shall be installed in such a way that their deflector is 
facing an upright position only with the frame arms parallel to the branch line to 
minimize the obstruction of its discharge pattern. 

ii.  Upright sprinklers shall be installed where there is no false ceiling, such as car 
park, stores, plant rooms and concealed spaces above false ceiling areas etc. 

iii. Pendent Sprinklers shall be installed as Recessed or concealed sprinklers where 

there is a false ceiling. 

iv. Pendent sprinklers installed as recessed or concealed sprinklers shall be per-

mitted to be used with, Civil Defence approved and listed flexible pipes. 

v.  The distance between the sprinkler deflector to the ceiling shall be not less than 

25mm and shall be not more than 300 mm. 

vi. Where the situation does not permits to locate the sprinkler head within 300mm 

from the ceiling and exceeds 300mm, it shall be fitted with a deflector plate 
made of stainless steel having a diameter not less than 200 mm and shall be 
attached to the deflector. 

vii. Sprinkler protective caps and straps shall be removed immediately after the com-

missioning of the sprinkler system. 

viii.Sprinklers shall be fitted with a protective guard where there is possibilities for 

accidental damage of sprinkler bulbs. 

ix.  The minimum distance between the sprinkler to the adjacent sprinkler shall be 

not less than 1.8 meters. 

x.  The maximum distance between the standard sprinkler and the adjacent stand-
ard sprinkler shall be not more than 4.5 meters. Where the extended coverage 
upright sprinklers are used, the maximum distance between sprinkler and sprin-
kler shall be not more than their approval listing as per the original equipment 
manufacturers technical data sheet. 

xi. The minimum distance between a sprinkler and a wall shall be not less than 100 

mm. 

xii. The maximum distance between a standard sprinkler and a wall shall be not 

more than 2.25 meters or ½ of the spacing between the sprinkler. 

xiii.There should not be any continuous or non-continuous obstructions such as col-
umns, beams, truss webs and chords, pipes, ducts, and other fixtures that could 
prevent a discharge pattern below the sprinkler head for less than or equal to 
500 mm.  

xiv.Sprinklers shall be installed under fixed obstructions over 800 mm wide such as 

ducts, cable trays, decks, open grate floorings etc. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 601 of 1348 

 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

27.  STANDARD 
PENDENT 
AND           
UPRIGHT 
SPRINKLERS 

xv.    The minimum clearance between the top of storage and the sprinkler head 

shall be not less than 500 mm and shall be 1000 mm in special situations for 
special sprinklers such as ESFR & ELO sprinklers. 

xvi.    Sprinklers under glass or plastic skylights exposed to the direct rays of the sun 

shall be of the intermediate-temperature classification. 

xvii      Where there is a vertical change in the ceiling elevation within the area of 

coverage of the sprinkler creating a distance of more than 900 mm between 
the upper ceiling and the sprinkler deflector, a vertical plane extending down 
from the ceiling at the change in elevation shall be considered a wall for the 
purpose of sprinkler spacing.  

xviii.    Where the distance between the upper ceiling and the sprinkler deflector is 
less than or equal to 900 mm, the sprinklers shall be permitted to be spaced 
as though the ceiling was flat, provided the obstruction rules and ceiling pock-
et rules are observed. 

xix.    Under an obstructed construction, the sprinkler shall be installed in each bay 
of such construction with the sprinkler deflector located not less than 25 mm 
to not more than 300mm from the ceiling. 

xx.      Sprinklers shall be located so as to minimize obstructions to discharge or addi-
tional sprinklers shall be provided to ensure an adequate coverage of the haz-
ard. 

xxi.     Sprinklers shall be permitted to be spaced on the opposite sides of obstruc-

tions not exceeding 1.2 m in width, provided the distance from the center line 
of the obstruction to the sprinklers does not exceed one-half the allowable 
distance permitted between sprinklers. 

xxii.    Obstructions located against the wall and that are not over 762 mm in width 

shall be permitted to be protected. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 602 of 1348 

 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

28. SIDEWALL 

SPRINKLERS 

i.  Sidewall sprinkler heads shall be installed along  a wall side, a side of a beam or 
beneath the flat smooth ceiling where upright or pendent sprinklers with open 
piping may not be desirable due to aesthetics issues. 

ii.  Sidewall sprinklers shall be installed such that their deflectors are aligned parallel 

to the ceiling or roof. 

iii. Sidewall sprinkler shall be installed on the ramps, for the protection of any office 

or room where there is no false ceiling and open piping is not desirable due to aes-
thetic issues. 

iv. Quick / fast response type sprinklers shall be installed in the light hazard areas.   
v.  The recessed / concealed pendent sprinklers shall be installed as per the installa-

tion guidelines recommended by the original equipment manufacturer. 

vi. Sidewall sprinkler protective caps and straps shall be removed immediately after 

the commissioning of the sprinkler system. 

vii. Sidewall sprinklers shall be fitted with a protective guard where there are possibili-

ties for accidental damage of sprinkler bulbs. 

viii.The distance between a side wall sprinkler deflector and the ceiling shall be not 
less than 100 mm and shall be not more than 150 mm. However in non combus-
tible ceiling areas the distance between the side wall sprinkler deflector and the 
ceiling shall be permitted to be 150mm to 300mm and 300mm to 450 mm if the 
sprinklers are listed for such use as per original equipment manufacturers tech-
nical data sheets. 

ix. Where soffits used for the installation of sidewall sprinklers exceed 203 mm in 

width or projection from the wall, additional sprinklers shall be installed below the 
soffit.  

x.  The minimum distance between the sprinkler and the adjacent sprinkler shall be 

not less than 1.8 m. 

xi. In light hazard occupancies, the maximum distance between the standard sidewall 

sprinkler and the adjacent standard sprinkler shall be not more than 4.25 m. and 
the room width shall be not more than 3.6 m. Where the extended coverage up-
right sprinklers are used, the maximum spacing between sprinklers along the wall 
and room width shall be not more than its approval listing as per the original 
equipment manufacturers technical data sheet. 

xii. In ordinary hazard occupancies, the maximum distance between the standard 

sidewall sprinklers to the adjacent standard sprinkler shall be not more than 3 m. 
and the room width shall be not more than 3 m. Where the extended coverage 
upright sprinklers are used, the maximum spacing between sprinklers along the 
wall and room width shall be not more than its approval listing as per the Original 
equipment manufacturers technical data sheet. 

xiii.The minimum distance between a sidewall sprinkler to a wall shall be not less 

than 100mm. 

xiv.The maximum distance between a standard sidewall sprinkler and a wall shall be 
not more than 2.125 m. in light hazard and shall be not more than 1.5 m. in ordi-
nary hazard or ½ of the spacing between the sprinkler. 

xv. There should not be any continuous or non-continuous obstructions such as col-
umns, beams, truss webs and chords, pipes, ducts and other fixtures that could 
prevent discharge pattern below the sprinkler head which is less than or equal to 
500 mm.  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 603 of 1348 

 

 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

28. SIDEWALL 

xvi.     Sprinklers shall be installed under fixed obstructions over 1.2 m wide such 

SPRINKLERS 

as ducts, cable trays, decks, open grate floorings etc. 

xvii.    The minimum clearance between the top of storage and the sidewall sprin-

kler head shall be not less than 500mm. 

xviii.   Sidewall sprinklers under glass or plastic skylights exposed to the direct rays 

of the sun shall be of the intermediate-temperature classification. 

xix.     Sidewall sprinklers shall be located so as to minimize obstructions to dis-

charge or additional sprinklers shall be provided to ensure an adequate cov-
erage of the hazard. 

xx.      Sidewall sprinklers shall be installed no closer than 1.2 m. from light fixtures 

or similar obstructions. 

29. OBSTRUCTIONS 

i.  The position of various types of sprinklers to avoid obstructions of discharge 

patterns shall be as per Table 9.7.D. 

Table 9.7.D: Maximum allowable distance of deflector above the obstruction base 

DISTANCE FROM SPRINKLERS TO  
OBSTRUCTIONS 
(A) 

STANDARD 
SPRINKLERS 
(B) 

SIDEWALL 
SPRINKLERS 
(B) 

EXTENDED    
COVERAGE 
SPRINKLERS 
(B) 

ESFR       
SPRINKLERS 
(B) 

1. Less than 300 mm  

2. 300 mm to less than 450 mm 

3. 450 mm to less than 600 mm 

0 mm 

65 mm 

90 mm 

25 mm 

75 mm 

115 mm 

4. 600 mm to less than 750 mm 

140 mm 

145 mm 

5. 750 mm to less than 900 mm 

190 mm 

175 mm 

6. 900 mm to less than 1050 mm 

240 mm 

200 mm 

7. 1050 mm to less than 1200 mm 

305 mm 

230 mm 

0 mm 

0 mm 

25 mm 

25 mm 

25 mm 

75 mm 

75 mm 

8. 1200 mm to less than 1350 mm 

355 mm 

250 mm 

125 mm 

9. 1350 mm to less than 1500 mm 

420 mm 

290 mm 

175 mm 

10. 1500 mm to less than 1700 mm 

457 mm 

325 mm 

175 mm 

11. 1700 mm to less than 1800 mm 

508 mm 

350 mm 

175 mm 

12. 1800 mm to less than 2000 mm 

600 mm 

380 mm 

225 mm 

13. 2000 mm to less than 2100 mm 

750 mm 

410 mm 

275 mm 

14. 2100 mm to less than 2300 mm 

875 mm 

440 mm 

350 mm 

15. 2300 mm to less than 2400 mm 

16. 2400 mm to less than 2600 mm 

17. 2600 mm to less than 2700 mm 

18. 2700 mm to less than 2900 mm 

19. 2900 mm to less than 3000 mm 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

350 mm 

375 mm 

425 mm 

475 mm 

525 mm 

0 mm 

35 mm 

75 mm 

140 mm 

200 mm 

250 mm 

300 mm 

375 mm 

450 mm 

550 mm 

650 mm 

775 mm 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 604 of 1348 

 

 
 
 
 
 

Figure 9.20.: Positioning of Sprinkler Deflectors from Obstructions 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 605 of 1348 

 

 
 
 
 
 

Figure 9.21.: Positioning of Sprinkler Deflectors from Obstructions 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 606 of 1348 

 

 
 
 
 
 

Figure 9.21.: Positioning of Sprinkler Deflectors from Obstructions 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 607 of 1348 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

30. HANGERS 

i.  Hangers shall be designed to support five times the weight of the water-filled pipe 

AND  
BRACES 

plus 250 lb (115 kg) at each point of piping support. 

ii.  The minimum distance between hangar supports, size of hangar rods, fasteners, 

bolts, clamps etc. shall be designed & selected and installed to withstand the load 5 
times the weight of water filled pipe, plus 115 kg load.  

iii. These points of support shall be adequate to support the system. 
iv. Hanger components shall be ferrous, listed and approved by Civil Defence as per      

Section 6. 

v.  All the supports provided for the sprinkler system piping shall allow the free move-

ment for expansion or contraction of pipe work and shall be located by ensuring that 
the branch lines or fittings are not affected by the supports during expansion or con-
traction of the pipe installation. 

vi. Sprinkler system main risers shall be supported by riser clamps or by hangers located 

on the horizontal connections within 600 mm of the center line of the riser. Riser 
clamps supporting risers by means of set screws and riser clamps anchored to walls 
using hanger rods in the horizontal position shall not be permitted to vertically sup-
port risers. 

vii. Vertical risers supported at the bottom of the riser at the lowest level, at each level, 

above & below the offsets and top of the risers. The maximum distance between 
each riser support shall not exceed 3 m. 

viii.An anchor support shall be provided at the base (bottom) of each vertical riser pipes 

to withstand the total weight of the pipe with water and to prevent the movement 
by an upward thrust in the sprinkler system. 

ix. The sizes of hanger rods, U-hooks and eye rods shall not be less than that of               

Table 9.7.E. 

x.  However, the hangars spacing and hangar rod size supporting the horizontal pipes 

shall be not less than the distance specified in Table 9.7.E. 

Table 9.5.E: Hanger Rods, U-Hooks, Eye Rod Sizes 

PIPE SIZES 

HANGER ROD    
SIZES 

U-HOOK   
SIZES 

EYE ROD   
SIZES 

BOLT OR ROD 
SIZES 

HANGER 
SPACING 

 

 

 

10 mm 

12 mm 

12 mm 

12 mm 

16 mm 

16 mm 

8 mm 

 

10 mm 

 

 

 

10 mm 

12 mm 

12 mm 

12 mm 

 

 

 

 

 

12 mm 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

10 mm 

12 mm 

12 mm 

12 mm 

16 mm 

20 mm 

2 meters 

2.5 meters 

 

 

 

3 meters 

3 meters 

3 meters 

3 meters 

Up to 50 mm 

65 mm to 100 mm 

65 mm to 150 mm 

Up to 100 mm 

125 mm 

150 mm 

200 mm 

250 mm 

300 mm 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 608 of 1348 

 

 

ITEMS 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

REQUIREMENTS 

31. A. DESIGN CRITERIA 

i.  All the design criteria for Automatic Sprinkler Systems provided in this 

BASED ON     
HAZARDS 

code are based on Single Point Design Density Selections. 

ii.  The automatic Sprinkler Design criteria based on the hazard category shall 

be as per Table 9.7.F. 

Table 9.7.F: Automatic Sprinkler Design Criteria based on Hazard Categories 

CRITERIA 

Design Density  
(mm/min) gpm/ft2 
Area of Operation        
( m2 ) Ft2 
Hose Stream Allowance, gpm 

1. 
LIGHT     
HAZARD 
      

2. 
ORDINARY  
HAZARD 
GROUP 1 

3. 
ORDINARY  
HAZARD 
GROUP 2 

4. 
EXTRA   
HAZARD 
GROUP 1 

5. 
EXTRA      
HAZARD 
GROUP 2 

(4.1) 0.10  

(6.1) 0.15  

(8.1) 0.20  

(12.2) 0.30   (16.3) 0.40  

(139) 1500 

(139) 1500 

(139) 1500  (232) 2500  (232) 2500 

50 gpm 

50 gpm 

50 gpm 

50 gpm 

50 gpm 

Total Water Demand, Gal. 

250 Gal. 

300 gpm 

350 gpm 

800 gpm 

1050 gpm 

Pump Capacity, without yard hydrant 
gpm 

Pump Capacity,  with yard hydrant 
gpm 

Standard Sprinkler            
Maximum Coverage Area 

Standard Sprinkler            
Maximum Spacing 

Extended Coverage Standard Sprinkler  
Maximum Coverage Area 

Extended Coverage Standard Sprinkler  
Maximum Spacing 

Sidewall Standard Sprinkler              
Maximum Coverage Area 

Sidewall Standard Sprinkler              
Maximum distance along wall (S) 

Sidewall Standard Sprinkler              
Maximum Room width (L) 

250 gpm 

300 gpm 

350 gpm 

750 gpm 

1000 gpm 

750 gpm 

750 gpm 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm  1500 gpm 

20.9 m2 

12.1 m2 

12.1 m2 

9.3 m2 

9.3 m2 

4.6 m 

4.6 m 

4.6 m 

3.7 m 

3.7 m 

37 m2 

30 m2 

30 m2 

18.2 m2 

13.4 m2 

6.1 m 

5.5 m 

5.5 m 

4.3 m 

4.6 m 

18.2 m2 

9.3 m2 

9.3 m2 

4.3 m 

3 m 

3 m 

11.1 m 

9.3 m 

9.3 m 

Not  
allowed 

Not  
allowed 

- 

- 

- 

- 

Extended Coverage Sidewall Sprinkler                              
Maximum Coverage Area 

37 m2 

37 m2 

37 m2 

Not  
allowed 

Not  
allowed 

Extended Coverage Sidewall Sprinkler  
Maximum Spacing 

ESFR (Early Suppression Fast Response) 
For ceiling height up to 9 m 
Maximum Coverage Area 

ESFR (Early Suppression Fast Response) 
For ceiling height up to 9 m 
Maximum Spacing 

ESFR (Early Suppression Fast Response) 
For ceiling height more than 9 m 
Maximum Coverage Area 

ESFR (Early Suppression Fast Response) 
For ceiling height more than 9 m 
Maximum Spacing 

 

8.5 m 

7.3 m 

7.3 m 

 

 

9.3 m2 

9.3 m2 

9.3 m2 

9.3 m2 

9.3 m2 

3.7 m 

3.7 m 

3.7 m 

3.7 m 

3.7 m 

9.3 m2 

9.3 m2 

9.3 m2 

9.3 m2 

9.3 m2 

3 m 

3 m 

3 m 

3 m 

3 m 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 609 of 1348 

 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. GENERAL NOTES FOR SPRINKLER DESIGN REQUIREMENTS  
 
i. 

Sprinkler design for various storage materials and storage arrangement 
shall be as per the tables Table 9.7.G., Table 9.7.H., Table 9.7.I., Table 
9.7.J., Table 9.7.K., Table 9.7.L., Table 9.7.M., Table 9.7.N., Table 
9.7.O., Table 9.7.P., Table 9.7.Q., Table 9.7.R., Table 9.7.S., Table 
9.7.T., Table 9.7.U., Table 9.7.V., Table 9.7.W., Table 9.7.X., Table 
9.7.Y., Table 9.7.Z., Table 9.7.AA., Table 9.7.BB., Table 9.7.CC., Table 
9.7.DD., Table 9.7.EE., Table 9.7.FF.,  and Table 9.7.GGG. 
Pump capacities based on the storage materials, storage height and 
storage arrangement shall be as per Table 9.7.G., Table 9.7.H., Table 
9.7.I., Table 9.7.J., Table 9.7.K., Table 9.7.L., Table 9.7.M., Table 9.7.N., 
Table 9.7.O., Table 9.7.P., Table 9.7.Q., Table 9.7.R., Table 9.7.S., Table 
9.7.T., Table 9.7.U., Table 9.7.V., Table 9.7.W., Table 9.7.X., Table 
9.7.Y., Table 9.7.Z., Table 9.7.AA., Table 9.7.BB., Table 9.7.CC., Table 
9.7.DD., Table 9.7.EE., Table 9.7.FF.,  and Table 9.7.GGG. 

ii. 

iii.  The pump capacity indicated in these tables is the duty point (primary 

rating point) of the pump. The fire pump design point and the head shall 
be selected based on the hydraulic calculation and fire pump character-
istic curve inline with NFPA 20. 

iv.  All sprinkler design densities are single point design criteria taken from 

v. 

NFPA 13 tables. 
The proposed pump capacities in these tables are rounded to the aver-
age and nearest capacities that are commercially available, listed and 
internationally listed and approved. 

vi.  Water Tank capacities shall be as per Section 4. of this chapter. 
vii.  The number of design sprinklers considered for ESFR type sprinkler pro-

tection shall be 12. 

viii.  The ceiling sprinkler design density for an aisle width between 1.2 m. 

and 2.4 m. shall be respectively determined by the linear interpolation 
of their densities.  

ix.  The in-Rack Sprinkler demand shall be calculated for the 8 remotest 

sprinkler. The in-rack Sprinkler minimum K factor shall be 5.6 and mini-
mum in-rack sprinkler pressure shall be 1 Bar. 

31.B. DESIGN CRITERIA 

BASED ON 
CHARTS 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 610 of 1348 

 

 

ITEMS 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

REQUIREMENTS 

32. DESIGN CRITERIA 
FOR IDLE PALLETS 

i.  The automatic Control Mode (Design/Area) Sprinkler Design criteria for idle 

wooden pallets stored indoors shall be as per Table 9.7.G. 

ii.  The automatic special application Sprinkler Design criteria for wooden pal-

lets stored indoors shall be as per (K11.2), Table 9.7.H.  

iii. The automatic Specific Application Sprinkler Design criteria for idle wooden 

pallets stored indoors on floor shall be as per (K16.8), Table 9.7.I. 

iv. The automatic Specific Application Sprinkler Design criteria for idle wooden 

pallets stored indoors on floor shall be as per (K19.6), Table 9.7.J. 

Table 9.7.G: Control Mode (Design/Area) for Idle Wooden Pallets Stored Indoors  

 
K-FACTOR 

MAXIMUM 
STORAGE 
HEIGHT 

MAXI-
MUM 
CEILING 
HEIGHT 

REQUIRED 
DESIGN DEN-
SITY Gpm 
(LPM) 

AREA OF SPRINKLER OPERA-
TION 
FT 2 (m2) 

HIGH TEMP 
SPRINKLER 

ORDINARY 
TEMP SPRIN-
KLER 

PUMP   
CAPACITY 
WITH HOSE 
DEMAND 

PUMP   
CAPACITY 
WITH  
YDRANTS 

8 (115)  
or Larger 

11.2 (160)  
or larger 

< 1.8 m 

6.1 m 

0.20 (8.2) 

2000 (186)  3000 (279) 

750 gpm 

1000 gpm 

< 2.4 m 

9.1 m 

0.45 (18.3) 

2500 (232) 

- 

1250 gpm  1500 gpm 

 
INDOOR       
STORAGE        
ARRANGE-
MENT 

ON FLOOR 

16.8 (242)  < 6.1 

9.1 m 

0.60 (24.5) 

- 

- 

- 

- 

ON FLOOR 
OR  RACK 
WITHOUT 
SOLID 
SHELVES 

11.2 (161)  
or larger 

2.4 m - 3.7 
m 

3.7 m - 6.1 
m 

9.1 m 

0.60 (24.5) 

3500 (325) 

- 

2000 gpm  2500 gpm 

9.1 m 

0.60 (24.5) 

4500 (418) 

- 

2500 gpm  3000 gpm 

Table 9.7.H: Specific Application for Idle Wooden Pallets Stored Indoors On Floor 

TYPE OF  
SYSTEM 

K-FACTOR / 
ORIENTATION 

MAXIMUM 
STORAGE 
HEIGHT 

MAXI-
MUM 
CEILING 
HEIGHT 

NUMBER OF DESIGN 
SPRINKLERS BY MINIMUM 
PRESSURE 
25 psi 

50 psi 

75 psi 

PUMP   CAPACI-
TY WITH HOSE 
DEMAND 

PUMP CAPACITY 
WITH  YDRANTS 

  
WET 
  

DRY 

11.2 (160) Upright  < 6.1 m 

9.1 m 

15 

11.2 (160) Upright  < 6.1 m 

9.1 m 

25 

- 

- 

- 

- 

1000 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

Table 9.7.I: Specific Application (K-factor 16.8) for Idle wooden Pallets Stored Indoors On Floor 

Table 9.5.F: Specific Application (K-factor 16.8) for Idle wooden Pallets Stored Indoors On Floor 

MAXIMUM 
STORAGE 
HEIGHT 

MAXIMUM 
CEILING 
HEIGHT 

NUMBER 
OF DESIGN 
SPRIN-
KLERS 
  

MINIMUM 
OPERAT-
ING PRES-
SURE 
(PSI) 

PUMP   CAPACI-
TY WITH HOSE 
DEMAND 

PUMP CAPACITY 
WITH  YDRANTS 

TYPE OFSYS-
TEM 

K-FACTOR/ 
ORIENTATION 
  

  
WET 
  
  
DRY 
  

16.8 (240) Upright 

6.1 m 

9.1 m 

16.8 (240) Upright 

6.1 m 

9.1 m 

15 

15 

15 psi 

1000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

15 psi 

1000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

Table 9.7.J: Specific Application (K-factor 19.6) for Idle wooden Pallets Stored Indoors On Floor 

TYPE OF SYS-
TEM 

K-FACTOR/ 
ORIENTATION 
  

MAXIMUM 
STORAGE 
HEIGHT 

MAXIMUM 
CEILING 
HEIGHT 

NUMBER 
OF DESIGN 
SPRIN-
KLERS 
  

MINIMUM 
OPERAT-
ING    
PRESSURE 
(PSI) 

PUMP   CAPACI-
TY WITH HOSE 
DEMAND 

PUMP CAPACITY 
WITH  YDRANTS 

19.6 (280) Pendent 

6.1 m 

9.1 m 

19.6 (280) Pendent 

6.1 m 

11 m 

19.6 (280) Pendent 

6.1 m 

12  m 

15 

15 

15 

16psi 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

25psi 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

30psi 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

  
WET 
  
  
WET 
  
  
WET 
  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 611 of 1348 

 

 

ITEMS 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

REQUIREMENTS 

33. DESIGN CRITERIA 
(ESFR) FOR IDLE  
PALLETS  

i.  The automatic ESFR Sprinkler Design criteria for idle wooden pallets stored 

indoors shall be as per Table 9.7.K. 

ii.  The automatic ESFR Sprinkler Design criteria for idle plastic pallets stored 

indoors shall be as per Table 9.7.L. 

Table 9.7.K: ESFR for Idle Wooden Pallets Stored Indoors  

STORAGE 
ARRANGE-
MENT 

COM-
MODITY 

MAXIMUM STORAGE HEIGHT (m) 

MINI-
MUM 
OPERAT-
ING PRES-
SURE 
(PSI) 

PUMP   
CAPACITY 
WITH HOSE 
DEMAND 

PUMP 
CAPACITY 
WITH  
YDRANTS 

  

7.6 
  

- 

6.1 
  

ON 
FLOOR 
OR 
RACKS    
WITH-
OUT 
SOLID 
SHELVE
S 

IDLE 
WOOD-
EN   
PAL-
LETS 

7.6 

  

ON 
FLOOR 

  

IDLE 
WOOD-
EN PAL-
LETS 

- 

MAXI-
MUM 
CEIL-
ING 
HEIG
HT 
(m) 

9.1 

10 

11 

12 

NOMINAL K-FACTORS 
FOR THE TYPE OF 
SPRINKLER ORIENTA-
TION 
  
UP-
RIGHT 
- 

  
PENDENT 
  
14 (201) 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 
- 
- 
- 
- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 
- 
- 

- 

- 

- 

16.8 (242) 

22.4 (322) 

25.2 (363) 

14 (201) 

16.8 (242) 

- 
- 
- 
- 
22.4 (322) 

25.4 (360) 

- 

16.8 (242) 

22.4 (322) 

25.2 (363) 

- 

- 

- 
- 
14 (201) 

16.8 (240) 

14 (201) 

16.8 (240) 

50 

35 

25 

15 

60 

42 

- 
- 
- 
- 
35 

20 

- 

52 

40 

25 

- 

- 

- 
- 
50 

35 

75 

52 

  

  

  

9.1 

  

11 

  
12 

13.7 

- 

9.1 

11 

  

 6.1 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

 
 
 
 
1500 gpm 

 
 
 
 
2000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2250 gpm 

- 

- 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

2000 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

- 

- 

- 

- 

 
 
1250 gpm 

 
 
1500 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

PUMP   
CAPACITY 
WITH HOSE 
DEMAND 

PUMP 
CAPACITY 
WITH  
YDRANTS 

1250 gpm 
1250 gpm 
 
 
1500 gpm 
1500 gpm 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1500 gpm 
1500 gpm 
 
 
2000 gpm 
2000 gpm 
 
 
 
 
 
 

- 

- 

 

 
 
 

- 

- 

 

 
 
 

STORAGE 
ARRANGE-
MENT 

COMMOD-
ITY 

MAXIMUM STORAGE HEIGHT 
(m) 

  

PENDENT 

14 (201) 
16.8 (242) 

MAXI-
MUM 
CEILING 
HEIGHT 
(m) 

NOMINAL K-FACTORS 
FOR THE TYPE OF 
SPRINKLER ORIENTA-
TION 
UP-
RIGHT 

Table 9.7.L: ESFR for Idle Plastic Pallets Stored Indoors  
MINI-
MUM 
OPER-
ATING 
PRES-
SURE 
(PSI) 
50 
35 
- 
- 
60 
42 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 

- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 

- 
- 

- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 

14 (201) 
16.8 (242) 

12 

- 

7.6 

  

9.1 

10 

- 

  

  

  

- 

11 

  

- 

IDLE     
PLASTIC 
PALLETS 

7.6 

  

ON 
FLOOR 
OR 
RACKS 
WITH-
OUT 
SOLID 
SHELVE
S 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 612 of 1348 

 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

34. DESIGN CRITE-

i.  The automatic Sprinkler Design criteria for Class I to Class IV stored palletized, 

solid piled or on shelf with storage height up to 3.7 m shall be as per Table 
9.7.M. 

RIA FOR CLASS I 
TO IV STORED 
PALLETIZED TO 
A HEIGHT OF 
UP TO  3.7 M 
AND 6.1 M. 

 

Table 9.7.M: Class I to Class IV stored palletized, solid piled or on shelves with storage height up to 3.7  

STORAGE  
ARRANGE-
MENT 

COMMODI-
TY CLASS 

MAXIMUM 
STORAGE 
HEIGHT 

REQUIRED   
DESIGNDENSITY 
Gpm (LPM) 

AREA OF  SPRINKLER 
OPERATION FT 2 (m2) 

PUMP   CAPACITY 
WITH HOSE DE-
MAND 

PUMP CAPACITY 
WITH  YDRANTS 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

IV 

IV 

PALLET-
IZED, 
BIN BOX, 
SHELF, 
IN RACK, 

PALLET-
IZED, BIN 
BOX, SHELF 

IN RACK 

 

< 3.7 m 

0.15 (6.1) 

1500 (140) 

 300 gpm  

750 gpm 

< 3 m 

0.15 (6.1) 

1500 (140) 

 300 gpm  

750 gpm 

3 m – 3.7 m 

0.20 (8.1) 

1500 (140) 

 350 gpm  

750 gpm 

< 3.7 m 

0.20 (8.1) 

1500 (140) 

 350 gpm  

750 gpm 

< 3 m 

0.20 (8.1) 

1500 (140) 

 350 gpm  

750 gpm 

3 m – 3.7 m 

0.20 (8.1) 

1500 (140) 

 350 gpm  

750 gpm 

3 m – 3.7 m 

0.30 (12.2) 

2500 (232) 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 613 of 1348 

 

 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

35. DESIGN CRITERIA 
FOR CLASS I TO IV 
STORED IN SINGLE 
OR DOUBLE ROW 
RACKS WITH 
STORAGE HEIGHT 
OF 3.7 M TO 6.1 M 
(WITHOUT SOLID 
SHELVES)  

i.  The automatic Sprinkler Design Criteria for Class I to IV stored in Single or 

Double row racks with storage height of 3.7 m to 6.1 m (Without Solid 
Shelves), shall be as per Table 9.7.O.  

ii.  The area of sprinkler operation shall be 186 m2 except for below. 

a.  The area of sprinkler operation shall be 215 m2 for design density 0.55 

(22.4), AMAO-(Assumed Maximum Area of Operation ) for high tem-
perature sprinklers. 

b.  The area of sprinkler operation shall be 370 m2 for design density 0.55 

(22.4), ordinary temperature  

iii.  Figure 9.22 is applicable for all design criteria in Table 9.7.O, except where 

in-rack sprinkler requirement is mandatory. 

iv.  The fire pump capacity indicated is for high temperature ceiling sprinkler 

and storage height of 6.1 m. 

Table 9.7.O: Class I to Class IV stored on racks without solid shelves with storage height 3.7 m—6.1 m 

CEILING SPRINKLER DESIGN DENSITY , Gpm/ft2 (mm/min) 

WITH IN RACK SPRINKLERS 

WITHOUT IN RACK SPRINKLERS 

SINGLE OR DOUBLE ROW 
RACKS 

SINGLE OR DOUBLE ROW RACKS 

AISLE WIDTH 
& 
ENCAPSULATION 

COM-
MODIT
Y CLASS 

IN RACK                
SPRIN-
KLERS 

HIGH              
TEMPERA-
TURE CEIL-
ING SPRIN-
KLER & OR-
DINARY            
TEMPERA-
TURE RACK 
SPRINKLER 

ORDINARY 
TEMPERA-
TURE CEIL-
ING SPRIN-
KLER & OR-
DINARY            
TEMPERA-
TURE RACK 
SPRINKLER 

HIGH               
TEMPERA-
TURE CEIL-
ING                 
SPRINKLERS 

ORDINARY         
TEMPERA-
TURE CEIL-
ING           
SPRINKLERS 

PUMP             
CAPACITY 
WITH HOSE 
DEMAND 
 

PUMP          
CAPACITY 
WITH  
YDRANTS 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

No Need 

No Need 

 

 

 

 

0.55 (22.4) 

0.55 (22.4)  1250 gpm 

2000 gpm 

0.55 (22.4) 

0.55 (22.4)  1250 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1 LEVEL 

0.35 (14.3) 

0.39 (15.9) 

1 LEVEL 

0.47 (19.1) 

0.55 (22.4) 

--- 

--- 

--- 

--- 

1000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

No Need 

No Need 

No Need 

No Need 

No Need 

No Need 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.32 (13.0) 

0.37 (15.0)  750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

0.38 (15.5) 

0.44 (17.9)  750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

0.43 (17.5) 

0.49 (20.0)  1000 gpm 

1250 gpm 

0.58 (23.6) 

0.60 (24.5)  1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

0.47 (19.1) 

0.54 (22.0)  1000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

0.47 (19.1) 

0.54 (22.0)  1000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1 LEVEL 

0.28 (11.4) 

0.32 (13.0) 

1 LEVEL 

0.39 (15.9) 

0.45 (18.3) 

--- 

--- 

--- 

--- 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

No Need 

No Need 

No Need 

No Need 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.29 (11.8) 

0.33 (13.4)  750 gpm 

1000 gpm 

0.32 (13.0) 

0.37 (15.0)  750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

0.37 (15.0) 

0.42 (17.1)  750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

0.49 (20.0) 

0.57 (23.2)  1000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1.2 M 
ENCAPSULAT-
ED 

1.2 M 
NOT ENCAP-
SULATED 

2.4 M 
ENCAPSULAT-
ED 

2.4 M 
NOT ENCAP-
SULATED 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 614 of 1348 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

36. DESIGN CRITERIA FOR 
CLASS I TO IV STORED 
ON RACKS OF 6.1 M 
TO AND 6.7 M. 
(WITHOUT SOLID 
SHELVES) 

i.  The automatic Sprinkler Design criteria for Class I to Class IV stored on 
single or double row racks with storage height 6.1 m to 6.7 m (without 
solid shelves) shall be as per Table 9.7.P., with Area of sprinkler opera-
tion of 2000 ft2 (186m2). 

ii.  Figure 9.22 is applicable for all design criteria in Table 9.7.P except 

where in-rack sprinkler requirement is mandatory. 

iii. The fire pump capacity indicated is for high temperature ceiling sprinkler 

and storage height of 6.7 m. 

 

Table 9.7.P: Class I to Class IV stored on racks without solid shelves and                                                             

storage height of 6.1 m to 6.7 m  

CEILING SPRINKLER DESIGN DENSITY , Gpm/ft2 (mm/min) 

WITH IN RACK SPRINKLERS 

WITHOUT IN RACK SPRINKLERS 

SINGLE OR DOUBLE ROW RACKS 

SINGLE OR DOUBLE ROW RACKS 

AISLE WIDTH 
& ENCAPSU-
LATION 

COM-
MODI
TY 
CLASS 

IN RACK   
SPRIN-
KLERS 

HIGH TEMPER-
ATURE CEIL-
ING SPRIN-
KLER & ORDI-
NARY                 
TEMPERA-
TURE RACK 
SPRINKLER 

ORDINARY TEM-
PERATURE CEIL-
ING SPRINKLER 
& ORDINARY             
TEMPERATURE 
RACK SPRINKLER 

HIGH          
TEMPER-
ATURE 
CEILING     
SPRIN-
KLERS 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

1 LEVEL 

1 LEVEL 

1 LEVEL 

1 LEVEL 

No Need 

No Need 

No Need 

No Need 

1 LEVEL 

1 LEVEL 

1 LEVEL 

1 LEVEL 

No Need 

No Need 

No Need 

No Need 

0.30 (12.2) 

0.35 (14.3) 

0.30 (12.2) 

0.35 (14.3) 

0.35 (14.3) 

0.39 (15.9) 

0.47 (19.1) 

0.55 (22.4) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.24 (9.8) 

0.24 (9.8) 

0.27 (11.0) 

0.27 (11.0) 

0.28 (11.4) 

0.32 (13.0) 

0.39 (15.9) 

0.45 (18.3) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

--- 

--- 

--- 

--- 

0.32 
(13.0) 

0.38 
(15.5) 

0.43 
(17.5) 

0.58 
(23.6) 

--- 

--- 

--- 

--- 

0.29 
(11.8) 

0.32 
(13.0) 

0.37 
(15.0) 

0.49 
(20.0) 

1.2 M 
ENCAPSULAT-
ED 

1.2 M 
NOT             
ENCAPSULAT-
ED 

2.4 M 
ENCAPSULAT-
ED 

2.4 M 
NOT              
ENCAPSULAT-
ED 

 

 

ORDI-
NARY 
TEM-
PERATU
RE CEIL-
ING  
SPRIN-
KLERS 

--- 

--- 

--- 

--- 

0.37 
(15.0) 

0.44 
(17.9) 

0.49 
(20.0) 

0.60 
(24.5) 

--- 

--- 

--- 

--- 

0.33 
(13.4) 

0.37 
(15.0) 

0.42 
(17.1) 

0.57 
(23.2) 

PUMP    
CAPACITY 
WITH HOSE 
DEMAND 

PUMP 
CAPACITY 
WITH  
YDRANTS 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1000 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1000 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 615 of 1348 

 

 

 

Figure 9.22.: Storage Height and Adjustment of Design Densities 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 616 of 1348 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

37. DESIGN CRITERIA FOR 
CLASS I TO IV STORED 
IN MULTIPLE ROW 
RACKS OF 4.9 M 
DEPTH AND AISLES 2.4 
M OR WIDER WITH 
STORAGE HEIGHT OF 
3.7 M TO 6.1 M. 

i.  The automatic Sprinkler Design Criteria for Class I to IV stored in Multi-

ple row racks of 4.9 m depth and aisles 2.4 m or wider with storage 
height of 3.7 m to 6.1 m shall be as per Table 9.7.R. with Area of sprin-
kler operation of 2000 ft2 (186m2). 

ii.  Figure 9.22 is applicable for all design criteria in Table 9.7.R. except for 

Class IV non encapsulated commodity till 4.6 m storage height. 

iii. The fire pump capacities indicated is for high temperature ceiling sprin-
kler for 4.6 m and 6.1 m storage height (with respect to the maximum 
storage height indicated) 

 

Table 9.7.R: Class I-Class IV stored on racks of 4.9 m depth, aisle 2.4 m or wider, height of 3.7 m-6.1 m 

HEIGHT 

COM-
MODITY 
CLASS 
  

ENCAPSU-
LATION 

IN RACK 
SPRIN-
KLERS 

CEILING SPRINKLER DESIGN DENSITY , Gpm/ft2 (mm/min) 

WITH IN RACK     SPRIN-
KLERS 

WITHOUT IN RACK     
 SPRINKLERS 

MULTIPLE ROW RACKS 

MULTIPLE ROW RACKS 

HIGH               
TEMPERA-
TURE CEIL-
ING         
SPRINKLER 
& ORDI-
NARY TEM-
PERATURE 
RACK 
SPRINKLER 

ORDINARY     
TEMPERA-
TURE CEIL-
ING         
SPRINKLER 
& ORDI-
NARY     
TEMPERA-
TURE RACK 
SPRINKLER 

HIGH         
TEMPERA-
TURE CEIL-
ING     
SPRIN-
KLERS 

ORDINARY 
TEMPERA-
TURE CEIL-
ING    
SPRINKLERS 

PUMP   
CAPACITY 
WITH HOSE 
DEMAND 

PUMP 
CAPACITY 
WITH  
YDRANTS 

No 

Yes 

No 

Yes 

No Need 

No 

No Need 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.37 (15.1)  0.41 (16.7) 

500 gpm 

1000 gpm 

0.46 (18.8)  0.51 (20.8) 

750 gpm 

1000 gpm 

0.42 (17.1)  0.47 (19.1) 

500 gpm 

1000 gpm 

0.52 (21.4)  0.59 (23.9) 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

0.47 (19.1)  0.52 (21.4) 

750 gpm 

1000 gpm 

Yes 

1 Level 

0.36 (14.6)  0.41 (16.7) 

N/A 

N/A 

750 gpm 

1000 gpm 

No 

No Need 

 

 

0.39 (15.7)  0.44 (17.9) 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

Yes 

1 Level 

0.48 (19.5)  0.56 (22.6) 

N/A 

N/A 

1000 gpm 

1250 gpm 

No 

Yes 

No 

Yes 

No Need 

No 

No Need 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.37 (15.1)  0.41 (16.7) 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

0.46 (18.8)  0.51 (20.8) 

1000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

0.42 (17.1)  0.47 (19.1) 

1000 gpm 

1250 gpm 

0.52 (21.4)  0.59 (23.9) 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

0.47 (19.1)  0.52 (21.4) 

1000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

Yes 

1 Level 

0.36 (14.6)  0.41 (16.7) 

No 

Yes 

1 Level 

0.39 (15.7)  0.44 (17.9) 

N/A 

N/A 

1000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

0.48 (19.5)  0.56 (22.6) 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

Over 
12 ft. 
(3.7 m) 
up to  
15 ft. 
(4.6 m) 

Over 
15 ft. 
(4.6 m) 
up to  
20 ft. 
(6.1 m) 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 617 of 1348 

 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

38. DESIGN CRITERIA FOR 

i.  The automatic Sprinkler Design Criteria for Class I to IV stored in Mul-

CLASS I TO IV STORED IN 
MULTIPLE ROW RACKS 
OF 4.6 M DEPTH AND 
AISLES NARROWER 
THAN 2.4 M, WITH 
STORAGE HEIGHT OF 3.7 
M TO 6.1 M. 

tiple row racks of 4.9 m depth and aisles narrower than 2.4 m, with 
storage height of 3.7 m to 6.1 m shall be as per Table 9.7.S. with Area 
of sprinkler operation of 2000 ft2 (186m2). 

ii.  Figure 9.22 is applicable for all design criteria in Table 9.7.S. except for 

Class IV non encapsulated commodity till 4.6 m storage height. 

iii. The fire pump capacities indicated is for high temperature ceiling 

sprinkler for 4.6 m and 6.1 m storage height (with respect to the maxi-
mum storage height indicated). 

 

Table 9.7.S: Class I-Class IV stored on racks of 4.9 m depth, Aisle less than 2.4 m, Height of 3.7 m-6.1 m 

HEIGHT 

COM-
MODITY 
CLASS 

ENCAPSU-
LATION 

IN RACK 
SPRIN-
KLERS 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

Over 

12 ft.  (3.7 
m) 

up to  

15 ft.  (4.6 
m) 

  

  

  

  

Over 

15 ft.  (4.6 
m) 

up to  

20 ft.  (6.1 
m) 

  

  

  

  

 

 

CEILING SPRINKLER DESIGN DENSITY , Gpm/ft2 (mm/min) 

WITH IN RACK SPRIN-
KLERS 

WITHOUT IN RACK SPRINKLERS 

MULTIPLE ROW RACKS 

MULTIPLE ROW RACKS 

HIGH TEM-
PERATURE 
CEILING 
SPRINKLER 
& ORDI-
NARY 
TEMPERA-
TURE RACK 
SPRINKLER 

ORDINARY 
TEMPERA-
TURE CEIL-
ING SPRIN-
KLER & 
ORDINARY 
TEMPERA-
TURE RACK 
SPRINKLER 

HIGH TEM-
PERATURE 
CEILING 
SPRIN-
KLERS 

ORDINARY 
TEMPERA-
TURE CEIL-
ING SPRIN-
KLERS 

PUMP   
CAPACITY 
WITH 
HOSE DE-
MAND 

PUMP 
CAPACITY 
WITH  
YDRANTS 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.37 (15.1)  0.41 (16.7) 

500 gpm 

1000 gpm 

0.46 (18.8)  0.51 (20.8) 

 750 gpm 

1000 gpm  

0.42 (17.1)  0.47 (19.1) 

 500 gpm 

1000 gpm  

0.52 (21.4)  0.59 (23.9) 

 750 gpm 

1250 gpm  

0.47 (19.1)  0.52 (21.4) 

 750 gpm 

1000 gpm  

No 

Yes 

No 

No Need 

Yes 

No 

Yes 

1 Level 

0.36 (14.6)  0.41 (16.7) 

N/A 

N/A 

 750 gpm 

1250 gpm  

No 

No Need 

 

 

0.39 (15.7)  0.44 (17.9) 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

Yes 

No 

Yes 

No 

Yes 

No 

Yes 

No 

Yes 

1 Level 

0.58 (23.6)  0.66 (26.9) 

0.23 (9.3) 

0.26 (10.6) 

0.29 (11.7)  0.33 (13.2) 

0.26 (10.6)  0.30 (12.2) 

1 Level 

0.33 (13.2)  0.38 (15.2) 

0.29 (11.7)  0.33 (13.2) 

0.36 (14.6)  0.41 (16.7) 

0.39 (15.7)  0.44 (17.9) 

0.58 (23.6)  0.66 (26.9) 

N/A 

N/A 

N/A 

N/A 

1000 gpm   1500 gpm  

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1000 gpm 

1250 gpm 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1500 gpm   2000 gpm  

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 618 of 1348 

 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

39. DESIGN CRITERIA FOR 

i.  The automatic Sprinkler Design criteria for Class I to Class IV stored on 

CLASS I TO IV STORED IN 
SINGLE OR DOUBLE 
ROW RACKS TO A STOR-
AGE HEIGHT OF 6.7 M 
TO AND  7.6 M. 
(WITHOUT SOLID 
SHELVES) 

single or double row racks with storage height up to 6.7 m to 7.6 m 
(without solid shelves) shall be as per Table 9.7.T. with Area of sprin-
kler operation of 2000 ft2 (186m2) 

ii.  Figure 9.22 is applicable for all design criteria in Table 9.7.T. except 

where in-rack sprinklers requirement are mandatory. 

iii. The fire pump capacities indicated is for high temperature ceiling 

sprinkler for storage height of 7.6 m. 

Table 9.7.T: Class I to Class IV stored on Single and Double row racks with storage 6.7 m to 7.6 m  

AISLE 
WIDTH & 
ENCAPSU-
LATION 

COM-
MODIT
Y 
CLASS 

IN RACK 
SPRIN-
KLERS 

CEILING SPRINKLER DESIGN DENSITY , Gpm/ft2 (mm/min) 

WITH IN RACK SPRIN-
KLERS 

SINGLE OR DOUBLE ROW 
RACKS 

HIGH TEM-
PERATURE 
CEILING 
SPRINKLER & 
ORDINARY                 
TEMPERA-
TURE RACK 
SPRINKLER 

ORDINARY 
TEMPERA-
TURE CEILING 
SPRINKLER & 
ORDINARY 
TEMPERA-
TURE RACK 
SPRINKLER 

WITHOUT IN RACK SPRINKLERS 

SINGLE OR DOUBLE ROW RACKS 

HIGH TEM-
PERATURE 
CEILING 
SPRINKLERS 

ORDINARY 
TEMPERA-
TURE                  
CEILING      
SPRINKLERS 

PUMP CA-
PACITY WITH 
HOSE                 
DEMAND 

PUMP CA-
PACITY WITH 
HYDRANTS 

1 LEVEL 

1 LEVEL 

1 LEVEL 

1 LEVEL 

No Need 

No Need 

No Need 

1 LEVEL 

1 LEVEL 

1 LEVEL 

1 LEVEL 

1 LEVEL 

No Need 

No Need 

No Need 

1 LEVEL 

0.30 (12.2) 

0.35 (14.3) 

0.30 (12.2) 

0.35 (14.3) 

0.35 (14.3) 

0.39 (15.9) 

0.47 (19.1) 

0.55 (22.4) 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1000 gpm  1500 gpm 

1250 gpm  1500 gpm 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.32 (13.0) 

0.35 (14.3) 

1250 gpm  1500 gpm 

0.38 (15.5) 

0.44 (17.9) 

1500 gpm  2000 gpm 

0.43 (17.5) 

0.49 (20.0) 

1500 gpm  2000 gpm 

0.39 (15.9) 

0.44 (17.9) 

0.24 (09.8) 

0.27 (11.0) 

0.24 (09.8) 

0.27 (11.0) 

0.28 (11.4) 

0.32 (13.0) 

0.39 (15.9) 

0.45 (18.3) 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

1000 gpm  1500 gpm 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1000 gpm  1500 gpm 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.29 (11.8) 

0.28 (11.4) 

1000 gpm  1500 gpm 

0.32 (13.0) 

0.37 (15.0) 

1250 gpm  1500 gpm 

0.37 (15.0) 

0.42 (17.1) 

1250 gpm  2000 gpm 

0.32 (13.0) 

0.37 (15.0) 

- 

- 

1000 gpm  1500 gpm 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

1.2 M 
ENCAPSU-
LATED 

1.2 M 
NOT              
ENCAPSU-
LATED 

2.4 M 
ENCAPSU-
LATED 

2.4 M 
NOT              
ENCAPSU-
LATED 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 619 of 1348 

 

 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

40. DESIGN CRITERIA FOR 
CLASS I TO IV STORED 
IN MULTIPLE ROW 
RACKS OF 4.9 M DEPTH 
AND AISLES 2.4 M NAR-
ROWER AND WIDER 
WITH STORAGE HEIGHT 
OF 6.1 M TO 7.6 M. 

i.  The automatic Sprinkler Design Criteria for Class I to IV stored in Multi-

ple row racks of 4.9 m depth and aisles 2.4 m or wider with storage 
height of 6.1 m to 7.6 m shall be as per Table 9.7.U. with Area of 
sprinkler operation of 2000 ft2 (186m2) 

ii.  The automatic Sprinkler Design Criteria for Class I to IV stored in Multi-
ple row racks of 4.9 m depth and aisles narrower than 2.4 m with stor-
age height of 6.1 m to 7.6 m shall be as per Table 9.7.V. with Area of 
sprinkler operation of 2000 ft2 (186m2) 

iii. Figure 9.22 is applicable only for design criteria where in-rack sprin-

klers are not required. 

iv. The fire pump capacities indicated is for high temperature ceiling 

sprinkler for storage height of 4.6 m to 7.6 m. 

Table 9.7.U: Class I-Class IV stored on racks of 4.6 m depth, aisle 2.4 m or wider, height of 6.1 m-7.6 m 

HEIGHT 

COM-
MODITY 
CLASS 

ENCAPSU-
LATION 

IN RACK 
SPRINKLERS 

CEILING SPRINKLER WATER DEMAND , Gpm (LPM) 

WITH IN RACK SPRINKLERS  WITHOUT IN RACK SPRINKLERS 

MULTIPLE ROW RACKS 

MULTIPLE ROW RACKS 

HIGH TEMPERA-
TURE CEILING 
SPRINKLER & 
ORDINARY             
TEMPERATURE 
RACK SPRINKLER 

ORDINARY TEM-
PERATURE CEIL-
ING         SPRIN-
KLER &        ORDI-
NARY              
TEMPERATURE  

HIGH             
TEMPERATURE 
CEILING SPRIN-
KLERS 

ORDINARY 
TEMPERATURE 
CEILING  SPRIN-
KLERS 

PUMP CAPACI-
TY WITH HOSE 
DEMAND 

PUMP CAPACI-
TY WITH HY-
DRANTS 

 

 

No 

No Need 

Yes 

No 

Yes 

1 Level 

0.29 (11.7) 

0.33 (13.2) 

0.37 (15.1)  0.41 (16.7) 

Over 
20 ft.       
(6.1 m) 
up to  
25 ft.       
(7.6 m) 
  
  
  
  
2000 gpm 
Table 9.7.V: Class I-Class IV stored on racks of 4.6 m depth, Aisle less than 2.4 m, Height of 6.1 m-7.6 m 

0.30 (12.2) 

0.38 (15.2) 

0.33 (13.2) 

0.41 (16.7) 

0.44 (17.9) 

0.56 (22.6) 

0.26 (10.6) 

0.33 (13.2) 

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

1250 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1000 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

0.29 (11.7) 

0.36 (14.6) 

No 

Yes 

No 

Yes 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

0.48 (19.5) 

0.39 (15.7) 

III 

IV 

N/A 

N/A 

1500 gpm 

I 

II 

1 Level 

2 Levels 

CEILING SPRINKLER WATER DEMAND , Gpm (LPM) 

HEIGHT 

COM-
MODITY 
CLASS 
  

ENCAP-
SULATI
ON 

IN 
RACK 
SPRIN-
KLERS 

WITH IN RACK SPRINKLERS 

MULTIPLE ROW RACKS 

HIGH TEMPERATURE 
CEILING SPRINKLER 
& ORDINARY           
TEMPERATURE RACK 
SPRINKLER 

ORDINARY           
TEMPERATURE    
CEILING SPRINKLER & 
ORDINARY           
TEMPERATURE RACK 
SPRINKLER 

PUMP CAPACITY 
WITH HOSE DE-
MAND 

PUMP CAPACITY 
WITH HYDRANTS 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

No 

Yes 

No 

Yes 

No 

Yes 

No 

Yes 

1 Level 

2 Lev-

els 

0.23 (9.3) 

0.26 (10.6) 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

0.29 (11.7) 

0.33 (13.2) 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

0.26 (10.6) 

0.30 (12.2) 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

0.33 (13.2) 

0.38 (15.2) 

1000 gpm 

1250 gpm 

0.29 (11.7) 

0.33 (13.2) 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

0.36 (14.6) 

0.41 (16.7) 

1000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

0.39 (15.7) 

0.44 (17.9) 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

0.58 (23.6) 

0.66 (26.9) 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

Over 
20 ft. 
(6.1 m) 
up to  
25 ft. 
(7.6 m) 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 620 of 1348 

 

 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

i.  The automatic Sprinkler Design criteria of CMSA and Nominal K-
factor for Class I to Class IV, Plastic and Rubber stored palletized, 
solid piled or on shelf with storage height up to 7.6 m shall be as per 
Table 9.7.X. 

41. DESIGN CRITERIA OF 

CMSA (CONTROL MODE 
SPECIFIC APPLICATION) 
AND NOMINAL K-FACTOR 
FOR CLASS I TO IV, RUB-
BER, PLASTIC STORED 
PALLETIZED, SOLID PILED 
TO A HEIGHT OF 7.6 M.  

Table 9.7.X: Class I to Class IV, Rubber, Plastic stored palletized, solid piled with storage up to 7.6 m  

STORAGE     
AR-
RANGEM
ENT 

COMMOD-
ITY CLASS 

MAXI-
MUM 
STOR-
AGE 
HEIGHT 
Meters 

MAXI-
MUM 
CEIL-
ING 
HEIGHT 
Meters 

NUMBER 
OF      
SPRIN-
KLERS 

CMSA TYPE 
NOMINAL K-
FACTOR 11.2 (161) 

K-FACTOR 16.8 (242) NUMBER OF SPRINKLERS 
BY      MINIMUM DESIGN PRESSURE 

I 

II 

III 

I or II 

III or IV 

IV 

PLASTICS 
AND RUB-
BER       
CARTONED 
OR    EX-
POSED           
UNEX-
PANDED 
PLASTIC 
AND RUB-
BER        
CARTONED 
OR    EX-
POSED       
EXPANDED 
PLASTICS 
AND RUB-
BER       
CARTONED 
OR    EX-
POSED            
UNEX-
PANDED 

I 

I 

II 

II 

III 

III 

IV 

IV 

PALLET-
IZED 

SOLID 
PILED 

 

7.6 

7.6 

7.6 

7.6 

7.6 

6.1 

6.1 

10.7 

10.7 

10.7 

9.1 

9.1 

9.1 

9.1 

15 

15 

15 

- 

- 

15 

25 

7.6 

9.1 

- 

- 

DE-
SIGN 
PRES-
SURE 

25 psi 

25 psi 

25 psi 

- 

- 

50 psi 

25 psi 

10 psi 
(0.7 
bar) 

22 psi 
(1.5 
bar) 

PUMP       
CAPACITY 
WITH HOSE 
DEMAND 

PUMP      
CAPACITY 
WITH        
HYDRANTS 

- 

- 

- 

15 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

1000 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1000 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1000 gpm 

1250 gpm 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

15 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

- 

- 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

15 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

5.5 

7.9 

15 

50 psi 

- 

6.1 

9.1 

15 

50 psi 

- 

- 

- 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

7.6 

9.1 

- 

- 

- 

15 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

6.1 

7.6 

6.1 

7.6 

6.1 

7.6 

6.1 

7.6 

9.1 

9.1 

9.1 

9.1 

9.1 

9.1 

9.1 

9.1 

15 

- 

15 

- 

15 

- 

15 

- 

25 psi 

- 

- 

15 

25 psi 

- 

- 

15 

25 psi 

- 

50 psi 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

15 

- 

15 

1000 gpm 

1250 gpm 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1000 gpm 

1250 gpm 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1000 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 621 of 1348 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

42. DESIGN CRITERIA OF 

i.  The automatic Sprinkler Design criteria of ESFR for Class I to Class IV, 

stored palletized, solid piled or on shelf shall be as per Table 9.7.Y. for 
a minimum of 12 sprinkler heads. 

ESFR FOR CLASS I TO IV, 
STORED PALLETIZED, 
SOLID PILED  

 

 

Table 9.7.Y: ESFR for Class I to Class IV, stored palletized, solid piled   

STOR-
AGE 
AR-
RANGEM
ENT 

COM-
MODITY 

MAXI-
MUM 
STOR-
AGE 
HEIGHT 

MAXI-
MUM 
CEILING 
HEIGHT 
Meters 

PALLET-
IZED OR 
SOLID 
PILED 

CLASS I, 
II, III, IV 

6.1 

7.6 

7.6 
  

9.1 

7.6 

10 

9.1 

11 

11 

12 

11 

12 

14 

14 

NOMINAL K-FACTORS FOR 
THE TYPE OF SPRINKLER 

UPRIGHT 

PENDENT 

14 (201) 

14 (201) 

16.8 (242) 

16.8 (242) 

- 
- 

22.4 (322) 
25.2 (363) 

14 (201) 

14 (201) 

16.8 (242) 

16.8 (242) 

- 

- 

22.4 (322) 

25.2 (363) 

14 (201) 

14 (201) 

- 

  

16.8 (242) 
- 

- 

- 

16.8 (242) 

14 (201) 

16.8 (242) 
22.4 (322) 

25.2 (363) 

14 (201) 

16.8 (242) 

16.8 (242) 

- 

- 

- 

- 
- 

- 

22.4 (322) 

25.2 (363) 

22.4 (322) 

25.2 (363) 
22.4 (322) 

25.2 (363) 

MINIMUM 
OPERAT-
ING PRES-
SURE (PSI) 

PUMP       
CAPACITY 
WITH HOSE 
DEMAND 

PUMP  
 CAPACITY WITH        
HYDRANTS 

50 

35 

25 
15 

50 

35 

25 

15 

60 

42 

75 

52 
35 

20 

75 

52 

40 

25 

40 

40 
40 

40 

1250 gpm  1500 gpm 

1250 gpm  1500 gpm 

1500 gpm  2000 gpm 
1250 gpm  1500 gpm 

1250 gpm  1500 gpm 

1250 gpm  1500 gpm 

1500 gpm  2000 gpm 

1250 gpm  1500 gpm 

1500 gpm  2000 gpm 

1500 gpm  2000 gpm 

1500 gpm  2000 gpm 

1500 gpm  2000 gpm 

1500 gpm  2000 gpm 

1500 gpm  2000 gpm 

1500 gpm  2000 gpm 

1500 gpm  2000 gpm 

2000 gpm  2000 gpm 

1500 gpm  2000 gpm 

2000 gpm  2000 gpm 

2000 gpm  2500 gpm 
2000 gpm  2000 gpm 

2000 gpm  2500 gpm 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 622 of 1348 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

43. DESIGN CRITERIA OF 

i.  The automatic Sprinkler Design criteria of CMSA (Control Mode Specific 

Application) and Nominal K-factor 11.2 (160) for Class I to Class IV, 
stored on Single, Double or Multiple racks with storage height up to 7.6 
m shall be as per  Table 9.7.Z.a.                                            

CMSA AND NOMINAL 
K-FACTOR FOR CLASS I 
TO IV, STORED IN SIN-
GLE, DOUBLE OR MUL-
TIPLE RACKS TO A 
HEIGHT OF 7.6 M.  

 
 

 

 

Table 9.7.Z.a.: CMSA and Nominal K-factor 11.2 for Class I to Class IV, stored in Racks up to 7.6 m 

TYPE OF 
SYSTEM 

COMMODI-
TYCLASS 

MAXIMUM 
STORAGE 
HEIGHT 

MAXIMUM 
CEILING 
HEIGHT 

LARGE DROP TYPE 
NOMINAL K-FACTOR 11.2 (160) / ORIENTATION 

NUMBER OF 
SPRINKLERS 

DESIGN PPRES-
SURE 

PUMP         
CAPACITY 
WITH HOSE 
DEMAND 

PUMP  
 CAPACITY 
WITH       
HYDRANTS 

6.1 

7.6 

6.1 

7.6 

9.1 

15 / upright 

25 psi 

1000 gpm 

1250 gpm 

9.1 

9.1 

9.1 

20 / upright 

25 psi 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

15 / upright 

25 psi 

1000 gpm 

1250 gpm 

15+ 1 level of 
in-rack 

25 psi 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

7.6 

10.6 

15+ 1 level of 
in-rack 

25 psi 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

7.6 

15/upright 

50 psi 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

20/ upright 

15 / upright 

15+ 1 level of 
in-rack 

20+ 1 level of 
in-rack 

15+ 1 level of 
in-rack 

50 psi 

75 psi 

50psi 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

50 psi 

2000 gpm 

2500 gpm 

75 psi 

2000 gpm 

2000 gpm 

25 / upright 

25 psi 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

30 / upright 

25 psi 

2000 gpm 

2000 gpm 

25 / Upright 

25 psi 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

6.1 

6.1 

7.6 

9.1 

9.1 

7.6 

10.6 

6.1 

7.6 

6.1 

9.1 

9.1 

9.1 

I, II 

III 

IV 

I,II 

III 

WET 

PRE- 
ACTION  
 
OR  
 
DRY 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 623 of 1348 

 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

44. DESIGN CRITERIA OF 

CMSA AND NOMINAL K
-FACTOR FOR CLASS I 
TO IV, STORED IN SIN-
GLE, DOUBLE OR MUL-
TIPLE RACKS TO A 
HEIGHT OF 7.6 M.  

i.  The automatic Sprinkler Design criteria of CMSA (Control Mode Spe-
cific Application) and Nominal K-factor 16.8 (240)  for Class I to Class 
IV, stored on Single, Double or Multiple racks with storage height up to 
7.6 m shall be as per Table 9.7.Z.b.                                           

 
 

Table 9.7.Z.b. CMSA and Nominal K-factor of 16.8 for Class I to Class IV,                                                          

stored in Racks up to 7.6 m 

K-FACTOR 16.8 (240) NUMBER OF SPRINKLERS BY MINIMUM DESIGN PRES-
SURE / ORIENTATION 

10 PSI 
(0.7 BAR) 

15 PSI 
(1  BAR) 

22 PSI 
(1.5 BAR) 

35 PSI 
(2.4 BAR) 

PUMP         
CAPACITY 
WITH HOSE 
DEMAND 

PUMP  
 CAPACITY 
WITH        
HYDRANTS 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1250 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

15 / 
upright 

15 / 
upright 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

  

- 

- 

- 
- 

- 

15 / 
upright 

  

15 / up-
right 

15+ 1 
level of 
in-rack  

- 

15 / up-
right 

15 / up-
right 

15 / up-
right 

- 

- 
  

- 

- 

TYPE OF 
SYSTEM 

COMMODI-
TYCLASS 

MAXI-
MUM 
STORAGE 
HEIGHT 

MAXI-
MUM 
CEILING 
HEIGHT 

I, II 

III 

WET 

6.1 

9.1 

7.6 

9.1 

6.1 

7.6 

9.1 

9.1 

7.6 

10.6 

6.1 

7.6 

6.1 

9.1 

IV 

7.6 

9.1 

7.6 

10.6 

6.1 

7.6 

6.1 

9.1 

9.1 

9.1 

PRE- 
ACTION  
 
OR  
 
DRY 

I,II 

III 

 

 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 
  

- 

- 
  

- 

- 

- 

20+ 1 
level of in
-rack 

15+ 1 
level of in
-rack 

2000 gpm 

2500 gpm 

25 / 
upright 

30 / 
upright 

25 / 
upright 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

2000 gpm 

2500 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 624 of 1348 

 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

45. DESIGN CRITERIA OF 

i.  The automatic Sprinkler Design criteria of CMSA (Control Mode Specific 

CMSA AND NOMINAL K
-FACTOR FOR CLASS I 
TO IV, STORED IN SIN-
GLE, DOUBLE OR MUL-
TIPLE RACKS TO A 
HEIGHT OF 7.6 M.  

 
 

Application) and Nominal K-factor 19.6 (280)  for Class I to Class IV, 
stored on Single, Double or Multiple racks with storage height up to 7.6 
m shall be as per Table 9.7.Z.c.                                            

Table 9.7.Z.c.: CMSA and Nominal K-factor of 19.6 for Class I to Class IV, stored in Racks up to 7.6 m 

TYPE OF 
SYSTEM 

COM-
MODIT
YCLASS 

MAXI-
MUM 
STOR-
AGE 
HEIGHT 

MAXI-
MUM 
CEILING 
HEIGHT 

K-FACTOR 19.6 (280) NUMBER OF SPRINKLERS BY MINIMUM DESIGN PRESSURE / 
ORIENTATION 

16 PSI 
(1.1 BAR) 

25 PSI 
(1.7 BARS) 

30PSI 
(2.1 BARS) 

PUMP       
CAPACITY WITH 
HOSE DEMAND 

PUMP  
 CAPACITY 
WITH  YDRANTS 

6.1 

9.1 

15 / pendent 

7.6 

9.1 

15 / pendent 

6.1 

9.1 

15 / pendent 

7.6 

9.1 

15 / pendent 

- 

- 

  

  

I, II 

III 

- 

- 

  

  

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

7.6 

10.6 

- 

15 / pendent 

 
 
15 / pendent 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

6.1 

7.6 

15 / pendent 

6.1 

9.1 

15 / pendent 

IV 

7.6 

9.1 

15 / pendent 

- 

- 
- 

- 

- 

- 
- 

- 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

7.6 

10.6 
 
 
12.2 

- 
  

15 / pendent 
 
  

- 
  
 
15 / pendent 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

WET 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 625 of 1348 

 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

46. DESIGN CRITERIA OF 

CMSA AND NOMINAL K-
FACTOR FOR CLASS I TO 
IV, STORED IN SINGLE, 
DOUBLE OR MULTIPLE 
RACKS TO A HEIGHT OF 
OVER 7.6 M.  

i.  The automatic Sprinkler Design criteria of CMSA (Control Mode Spe-
cific Application) and Nominal K-factor 11.2 (160) for Class I to Class 
IV, stored on Single, Double or Multiple racks with storage height over 
7.6 m shall be as per Table 9.7.AA.a.    

ii.  NFPA 13 shall be followed for in-rack installation criteria.                                   
 
 

 

Table 9.7.AA.a.: CMSA and Nominal K-factor of 11.2 for Class I to Class IV, stored in Racks Over 7.6 m 

TYPE OF           
SYSTEM 

COMMODITY 
CLASS 

MAXIMUM 
STORAGE 
HEIGHT 

MAXIMUM 
CEILING 
HEIGHT 

LARGE DROP TYPE 
NOMINAL K-FACTOR 11.2 (160)/ ORIENTATION 

NUMBER OF 
SPRINKLERS 

DESIGN 
PRESSURE 

PUMP   CAPACITY 
WITH HOSE DE-
MAND 

PUMP  
 CAPACITY WITH  
YDRANTS 

9.1 

        10.6 

I, II 

20 + 1 
level of in 
rack / up-
right 

    25 PSI 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

10.6 

        12.1 

    - 

    - 

WET 

III, IV 

9.1 

        10.6 

    - 

    - 

  

  

  

  

  

10.6 

  

  

12.1 

    - 

    - 

 

 

 

 

 

 

PRE -ACTION 
OR  
DRY 

I, II 

9.1 

        10.6 

30 + 1 
level of in 
rack / up-
right 

25 PSI 

2000 gpm 

2500 gpm 

10.6 

        12.1 

36 /upright 

55 psi 

3000 gpm 

3500 gpm 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 626 of 1348 

 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

47. DESIGN CRITERIA OF CMSA 
AND NOMINAL K-FACTOR 
FOR CLASS I TO IV, STORED 
IN SINGLE, DOUBLE OR 
MULTIPLE RACKS TO A 
HEIGHT OF OVER 7.6 M.  

i.  The automatic Sprinkler Design criteria of CMSA (Control Mode 

Specific Application) and Nominal K-factor 16.8 (240) for Class I to 
Class IV, stored on Single, Double or Multiple racks with storage 
height over 7.6 m shall be as per Table 9.7.AA.b.         

ii.  NFPA 13 shall be followed for in-rack installation criteria.                                   
                              
 
 

Table 9.7.AA.b.: CMSA and Nominal K-factor 16.8 for Class I to Class IV, stored in Racks Over 7.6 m 

TYPE OF 
SYSTEM 

COMMODITY 
CLASS 

MAXIMUM 
STORAGE 
HEIGHT 

MAXIMUM 
CEILING 
HEIGHT 

K-FACTOR 16.8 (240) NUMBER OF SPRINKLERS BY MINIMUM DESIGN 
PRESSURE / ORIENTATION 

  
15 PSI(I BAR) 

  
22 PSI(1.5 BARS) 

PUMP   CAPACI-
TY WITH HOSE 
DEMAND 

PUMP        
CAPACITY 
WITH  
YDRANTS 

  

  

    - 

    - 

    - 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

 

 

 

 

 

 

12.1 

    - 

    - 

9.1 

        10.6 

  

20 + 1 level 
of in rack  

  

10.6 

        12.1 

    - 

        10.6 

    - 

9.1 

  

10.6 

  

  

9.1 

        10.6 

30 + 1 level 
of in rack  

    - 

2000 gpm 

2500 gpm 

10.6 

        12.1 

  

 36 /upright 

3000 gpm 

3500 gpm 

WET 

I, II 

 

III, IV 

PRE -ACTION 
OR  
DRY 

I, II 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 627 of 1348 

 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

48. DESIGN CRITERIA OF CMSA 
AND NOMINAL K-FACTOR 
FOR CLASS I TO IV, 
STORED IN SINGLE,     
DOUBLE OR MULTIPLE 
RACKS TO A HEIGHT OF 
OVER 7.6 M.  

i.  The automatic Sprinkler Design criteria of CMSA (Control Mode 

Special Application)  and Nominal K-factor 19.6 (280) for Class I to 
Class IV, stored on Single, Double or Multiple racks with storage 
height over 7.6 m shall be as per Table 9.7.AA.c.          

ii.  NFPA 13 shall be followed for in-rack installation criteria.                                   
                            
 
 

Table 9.7.AA.c.: CMSA and Nominal K-factor of 19.6 for Class I to Class IV, stored in Racks Over 7.6 m 

TYPE OF 
SYSTEM 

COMMODITY 
CLASS 

MAXIMUM 
STORAGE 
HEIGHT 

MAXIMUM 
CEILING 
HEIGHT 

9.1 

        10.6 

I, II 

10.6 

        12.1 

K-FACTOR 19.6 (280) NUMBER OF SPRINKLERS BY MINIMUM DESIGN 
PRESSURE /ORIENTATION 

  
25 PSI(I.7 
BARS) 

  
30 PSI(2.1 
BARS) 

PUMP   CAPACITY 
WITH HOSE DE-
MAND 

PUMP CAPACITY 
WITH  YDRANTS 

 

  

15 /                
pendent 

  

  

    - 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

15 /                
pendent 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

WET 

III, IV 

9.1 

        10.6 

15 /                  
pendent 

    - 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

  

  

  

  

  

10.6 

  

  

  

  

12.1 

    - 

1500 gpm 

15 /                  
pendent 

2000 gpm 

9.1 

        10.6 

    - 

    - 

10.6 

        12.1 

    - 

    - 

 

 

 

 

PRE -
ACTION 
OR  
DRY 

I, II 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 628 of 1348 

 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

49. DESIGN CRITERIA OF ESFR 

i.  The automatic Sprinkler Design criteria of ESFR for Class I to Class IV, 

FOR CLASS I TO IV, 
STORED  IN  SINGLE, 
DOUBLE OR MULTIPLE 
RACKS UP TO A HEIGHT 
OF 7.6 M 

 
 

stored in Single, Double or Multiple racks with storage height up to 
7.6 m shall be as per Table 9.7.BB., for a minimum of 12 sprinkler 
heads. 

Table 9.7.BB.: ESFR for Class I to Class IV, stored in Racks up to a height of 7.6 m 

STORAGE 
ARRANGE-
MENT 

COM-
MODITY 

MAXIMUM 
STORAGE 
HEIGHT 
(m) 

MAXI-
MUM    
CEILING 
HEIGHT 
(m) 

  

7.6 

MINIMUM 
OPERATING 
PRESSURE (PSI) 

PUMP   
CAPACITY 
WITH 
HOSE 
DEMAND 

PUMP CA-
PACITY WITH  
YDRANTS 

50 

35 

25 

15 

50 

35 

25 

15 

60 

42 

75 

52 

35 

20 

75 

52 

40 

25 

- 

- 

40 

40 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

2000 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

- 

- 

- 

- 

2000 gpm 

2000 gpm 

2000 gpm 

2500 gpm 

NOMINAL K-FACTORS 
FOR THE TYPE OF SPRIN-
KLER ORIENTATION 

UPRIGHT 

PENDENT 

14 (201) 

14 (201) 

16.8 
(242) 

- 

- 

16.8 (242) 

22.4 (322) 

25.2 (363) 

14 (201) 

14 (201) 

16.8 
(242) 

- 

- 

16.8 (242) 

22.4 (322) 

25.2 (363) 

14 (201) 

14 (201) 

16.8 
(242) 

16.8 (242) 

14 (201) 

14 (201) 

9.1 

9.8 

16.8 
(242) 

10.7 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

  

  

12.2 

13.7 

16.8 (242) 

22.4 (322) 

25.2 (363) 

14 (201) 

16.8 (242) 

22.4 (322) 

25.2 (363) 

- 

 

22.4 (322) 

25.2 (363) 

SINGLE-ROW, 
DOUBLE-
ROW, AND 
MULTIPLE-
ROW RACK 
(NO OPEN-
TOP         
CONTAINERS) 

CLASS I, II, 
III, OR IV, 
ENCAPSU-
LATED OR 
NOT EN-
CAPSULAT
ED 

6.1 

  

7.6 

  

  

  

  

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 629 of 1348 

 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

50. DESIGN CRITERIA OF 

ESFR FOR CLASS I TO IV, 
STORED  IN    SINGLE, 
DOUBLE OR MULTIPLE 
RACKS UP TO A HEIGHT 
OF OVER 7.6 M 

i.  The automatic Sprinkler Design criteria of ESFR for Class I to Class IV, 
stored in Single, Double or Multiple racks with storage height of over 
7.6 m shall be as per Table 9.7.CC., for a minimum of 12 sprinkler 
heads. 

 
 

Table 9.7.CC.: ESFR for Class I to Class IV, stored in Racks up to a height of over 7.6 m 

STORAGE    
ARRANGE-
MENT 

COMMODI-
TY 

MAXIMUM STOR-
AGE HEIGHT (m) 

SINGLE-
ROW, DOU-
BLE-ROW, 
AND MULTI-
PLE-ROW 
RACK (NO 
OPEN-TOP 
CONTAIN-
ERS) 

CLASS I, II, III, 
OR IV, ENCAP-
SULATED OR 
NOT ENCAP-
SULATED 

9.1 

  

  

  

10.7 

  

  

12.2 

MAXI-
MUM 
CEILING 
HEIGHT 
(m) 

NOMINAL K-FACTORS 
FOR THE TYPE OF 
SPRINKLER ORIENTA-
TION 

UPRIGHT 

PEN-
DENT 

14 (201) 

14 (201) 

16.8 (242) 

16.8 (242) 

10.7 

12.2 

13.7 

  

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

22.4 (322) 

25.2 (363) 

14 (201) 

16.8 (242) 

22.4 (322) 

25.2 (363) 

- 

- 

22.4 (322) 

25.2 (363) 

MINI-
MUM 
OPER-
ATING 
PRES-
SURE 

75 

52 

35 

20 

75 

52 

40 

20 

- 

- 

40 

40 

PUMP   
CAPACITY 
WITH 
HOSE 
DEMAND 

PUMP 
CAPACITY 
WITH  
YDRANTS 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

2000 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

- 

- 

- 

- 

2000 gpm 

2000 gpm 

2000 gpm 

2500 gpm 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 630 of 1348 

 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

51. DESIGN CRITERIA 
GROUP A PLASTIC 
STORED PALLETIZED, 
BIN BOX, SHELF OR 
RACKS WITH STORAGE 
HEIGHT UP TO 3.7 M. 

i.  The automatic Sprinkler Design criteria for Group A plastic stored pal-
letized, bin box, shelf or racks with storage height of up to 3.7 m shall 
be as per Table 9.7.DD. 

 
 

Table 9.7.DD.: Group A Plastic stored up to 3.7 m 

COMMODITY CLASS 

STORAGE 
ARRANGE-
MENT 

MAXI-
MUM 
STORAGE 
HEIGHT 

MAXI-
MUM 
CEIL-
ING 
HEIGHT 

RE-
QUIRED 
DESIGN  
DENSITY 
Gpm 
(LPM) 

AREA OF 
SPRIN-
KLER 
OPERA-
TION 
FT 2 (m2) 

IN 
RACK 
SPRIN-
KLER 
  

PUMP   
CAPACITY 
WITH HOSE 
DEMAND 

PUMP 
CAPACITY 
WITH  
YDRANTS 

GROUP A PLASTIC CAR-
TONED 
UNEXPANDED AND 
EXPANDED 

  

GROUP 
A PLAS-
TIC 
EX-
POSED 

UNEXPAND-
ED AND 
EXPANDED 

UNEXPAND-
ED 

PALLETIZED 

BIN 
BOX,SHELF, 

IN RACK 
PALLETIZED 
BIN BOX, 
SHELF 
IN RACK 
PALLETIZED 
BIN BOX, 
SHELF, IN 
RACK 
PALLETIZED 
BIN BOX, 
SHELF 

IN RACK 

PALLETIZED 
BIN BOX, 
SHELF, IN 
RACK 

< 1.5 m 
1.5 m – 3 m 
1.5 m – 3 m 
3 m – 3.7 m 
3 m – 3.7 m 

- 
4.6 m 
6 .1 m 
5.2 m 
10  m 

0.20 (8.1) 
0.30 (12.2) 
0.40 (16.3) 
0.40 (16.3) 
0.20 (8.1) 

1500 (140)  No need 
2500 (232)  No need 
2500 (232)  No need 
2500 (232)  No need 
1500 (140) 
1 LEVEL 

350 gpm 

750 gpm 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

500 gpm 

1000 gpm 

3 m – 3.7 m 

10  m 

0.40 (16.3) 

2500 (232)  No need 

1000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

3 m – 3.7 m 
< 1.5 m 

10  m 

- 

0.20 (8.1) 
0.20 (8.1) 

1500 (140) 
1 LEVEL 
1500 (140)  No need 

400 gpm 

750 gpm 

350 gpm 

750 gpm 

1.5 m – 3 m 

4.6 m 

0.40 (16.3) 

2500 (232)  No need 

1000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1.5m–2.4m 
3 m – 3.7 m 

8.5 m 
5.2 m 

0.40 (16.3) 
0.40 (16.3) 

2500 (232)  No need 
2500 (232)  No need 

1000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

3 m – 3.7 m 
3 m – 3.7 m 

5.2 m 
10  m- 

0.40 (16.3) 
0.20 (8.1) 

2500 (232)  No need 
1 LEVEL 
1500 (140) 

1000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

500 gpm 

1000 gpm 

1.5 m – 3 m 

6.1 m 

0.40 (16.3) 

2500 (232)  No need 

1000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

EXPANDED 

IN RACK 

1.5 m – 3 m 

6.1 m 

0.20 (8.1) 

1500 (140) 

1 LEVEL 

500 gpm 

1000 gpm 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 631 of 1348 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

52. DESIGN CRITERIA OF 

i.  The automatic ESFR Sprinkler Design criteria for Group A Plastic and 

ESFR SPRINKLERS FOR 
PALLETIZED OR SOLID 
PILED GROUP A PLAS-
TIC AND RUBBER. 

 

Rubber stored palletized of solid piled shall be as per Table 9.7.EE., for a 
minimum of 12 sprinkler head operation. 

ii.  ‘*’ Not applicable to storage height of 6.1 m. 
 
 

Table 9.7.EE.: ESFR for Group A Plastic and Rubber palletized or Solid Piled 

STOR-
AGE        
AR-
RANGE
MENT 

COM-
MODITY 

MAXIMUM STORAGE HEIGHT 
(Meters) 

MAXI-
MUM 
CEILING 
HEIGHT 
(Meters
) 

NOMINAL K-
FACTORS FOR THE 
TYPE OF SPRINKLER  
ORIENTATION 

UP-
RIGHT 

PEN-
DENT 

MINI-
MUM 
OPER-
ATING  
PRES-
SURE 

  

14 (201) 

14 (201) 

PALLET-
IZED OR 
SOLID 
PILED 

PLASTIC       
CAR-
TONED 
UNEX-
PANDED 

  

  

  

6.1 

  

7.6 

  

9.1 

  

  

11 

  

12 

6.1 

PLASTIC           
EXPOSED      
UNEX-
PANDED 

  

7.6 

  

PALLET-
IZED OR 
SOLID 
PILED 
  

6.1 

PLASTIC           
CAR-
TONED 
EXPAND-
ED 

  

7.6 

  

  

  

9.1 

  

  

  

  

11 

  

  

7.6 

16.8 (242) 

- 
- 

14 (201) 
16.8 (242) 

- 
- 

14 (201) 
16.8 (242) 

- 
- 

- 

- 
- 
- 
- 

- 

- 

- 

- 
- 
- 
- 

- 

- 

  

14 (201) 
16.8 (242) 

14 (201) 
16.8 (242)

- 

9.1 

11 

12 

14 

7.6 

9.1 

11 

12 

7.6 

9.1 

16.8 (242) 
22.4 (322) 
25.2 (363) 
14 (201) 
16.8 (242) 
22.4 (322) 
25.2 (363) 
14 (201) 
16.8 (242) 
22.4 (322) 
25.2 (363) 

14 (201) 

16.8 (242) 
22.4 (322) 
25.2 (363) 
22.4 (322) 

25.2 (363) 

14 (201) 

16.8 (242) 

14 (201) 
16.8 (242) 
14 (201) 
16.8 (242) 

14 (201) 

16.8 (242) 
25.2 (363)
* 
14 (201) 
16.8 (242) 

14 (201) 
16.8 (242) 

10 

14 (201)* 

14 (201)* 

7.6 

  

12 

16.8 (242)

* 
  

16.8 (242)
* 
25.2 (363) 

PLASTIC        
EXPOSED 
& EX-
PANDED 

 

PUMP   
CAPACITY 
WITH 
HOSE 
DEMAND 

PUMP 
CAPACITY 
WITH  
YDRANTS 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1250 gpm 
1500 gpm 
1250 gpm 
1250 gpm 
1250 gpm 
1500 gpm 
1250 gpm 
1500 gpm 
1500 gpm 
1500 gpm 
1500 gpm 

1500 gpm 
2000 gpm 
1500 gpm 
1500 gpm 
1500 gpm 
2000 gpm 
1500 gpm 
2000 gpm 
2000 gpm 
2000 gpm 
2000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1500 gpm 
2000 gpm 
1500 gpm 
1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 
2500 gpm 
2000 gpm 
2000 gpm 

2000 gpm 

2000 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 

1250 gpm 
1250 gpm 
1500 gpm 
1500 gpm 

1500 gpm 
1500 gpm 
2000 gpm 
2000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

50 

35 
25 
15 
50 
35 
25 
15 
75 
52 
35 
20 

75 

52 
40 
25 
40 

40 

50 

35 

50 
35 
75 
52 

75 

52 

 50 

2000 gpm 

2500 gpm 

50 
35 

50 
35 

60 

42 

60 

1250 gpm 
1250 gpm 

1250 gpm 
1250 gpm 

1500 gpm 
1500 gpm 

1500 gpm 
1500 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

1500 gpm 

2000 gpm 

2500 gpm 

2500 gpm 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 632 of 1348 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

53. DESIGN CRITERIA FOR 
TIRES STORED SOLID 
PILED, ON SHELF OR IN 
RACKS UP TO 3.7 M 

i.  The automatic Sprinkler Design criteria for Tires stored solid piled, on 

shelf or in racks with storage height of up to 3.7 m shall be as per Table 
9.7.FF. 

 

Table 9.7.FF: Tires stored up to height of 3.7 m 

COM-
MODITY 
CLASS 

STORAGE       
ARRANGEMENT 

MAXIMUM 
STORAGE 
HEIGHT 

MAXI-
MUM 
CEILING 
HEIGHT 

REQUIRED 
DESIGN  
DENSITY 
Gpm 
(LPM) 

AREA OF        
SPRINKLER       
OPERA-
TION 
FT 2 (m2) 

IN 
RACK 
SPRIN-
KLER 
  

PUMP   CAPACI-
TY WITH HOSE 
DEMAND 

PUMP CAPACITY 
WITH  YDRANTS 

TIRES 
  

ON FLOOR, ON 
SIDE 
ON FLOOR, ON 
TREAD OR ON 
SIDE 
SINGLE DOUBLE 
OR MULTIPLE-
ROW ON RACKS 
ON TREAD OR ON 
SIDE 
SINGLE-ROW 
RACK,          PORT-
ABLE, ON TREAD 
OR ON SIDE 
SINGLE-ROW 
RACK, FIXED, ON 
TREAD OR ON 
SIDE 

1.5 m – 3.7 m 

10  m 

0.30 (12.2) 

2500 (232) 

No need 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

<1.5 m 

<1.5 m 

  

  

0.20 (8.1) 

1500 (140) 

No need 

350 gpm 

750 gpm 

0.20 (8.1) 

1500 (140) 

No need 

350 gpm 

750 gpm 

1.5 m – 3.7 m 

10  m 

0.30 (12.2) 

2500 (232) 

No need 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1.5 m – 3.7 m 

10  m 

0.30 (12.2) 

2500 (232) 

No need 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

1.5 m – 3.7 m 

10  m 

0.20 (8.1) 

1500 (140) 

1 LEVEL 

500 gpm 

1000 gpm 

 

 

Figure 9.24.: Tire Storage arrangement for illustration 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 633 of 1348 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

54. DESIGN CRITERIA 

i.  The automatic Sprinkler Design criteria for Rolled Paper with storage 

height of up to 3.7 m shall be as per Table 9.7.GG. 

FOR ROLLED PAPER 
STORED UP TO 3.7 M 

 
 

 

Table 9.7.GG: Rolled Paper stored up to height of 3.7 m 

COMMODITY 
CLASS 

STORAGE         
ARRANGE-
MENT 

MAXI-
MUM 
STORAGE 
HEIGHT 
(Meters) 

MAXI-
MUM 
CEILING 
HEIGHT 
(Meters) 

REQUIRED   
DESIGN 
DENSITY 
Gpm (LPM) 

AREA OF 
SPRINKLER 
OPERATION 
FT 2 (m2) 

IN RACK 
SPRIN-
KLER 
  

PUMP   
CAPACITY 
WITH 
HOSE 
DEMAND 

PUMP CA-
PACITY 
WITH  
YDRANTS 

ON END 

< 3 m 

8 m 

0.20 (8.1) 

1500 (140) 

No need 

350 gpm 

750 gpm 

ON END 

< 3 m 

8 m 

0.30 (12.2) 

2500 (232) 

No need 

750 gpm 

1250 gpm 

ROLLED PAPER 
HEAVY AND     
MEDIUM 
WEIGHT 

ROLLED PA-
PER, TISSUE 
AND LIGHT 
WEIGHT 

 

Figure 9.25.: Paper Roll warehouse for illustration 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 634 of 1348 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

55. DESIGN CRITERIA 

FOR INDOOR 
STORAGE OF 
FLAMMABLE AND 
COMBUSTIBLE              
LIQUIDS IN METAL 
CONTAINERS 

i.  Water miscible flammable and combustible liquids with a concentration less 
than 50% and stored in metal containers shall be protected as Class IV com-
modity. 

ii.  All other type of flammable and combustible liquids stored in metal contain-
ers shall be protected by a fire water sprinkler system as per Table 9.7.HH. 
iii. The in-rack sprinkler design shall be based on the 8 most remote sprinklers 

if there is one level of in-rack sprinklers or 6 most remote sprinklers for 2 
levels of in-rack sprinklers or 6 most remotes sprinklers for top 3 levels, if 
there are three or more levels of in-rack sprinklers. Water demand per in-
rack sprinkler shall be 30 GPM. In-rack sprinkler shall be K5.6 ordinary tem-
perature quick response type.  

iv. Refer to Table 9.7.KK. For Sprinkler layouts and Schemes. 

Table 9.7.HH.: Water Miscible Flammable and Combustible Liquids in Metal Containers 

LIQUID 

STOR-
AGE 
TYPE 

STOR-
AGE 
HEIGHT 
M 

CEIL-
ING 
HEIGHT 
M 

FIRE WATER SPRINKLER SYSTEM DESIGN 
CRITERIA 

PUMP CAPACITY 

CEILING 

SPRINKLER 

IN-
RACK 
LAYOUT 

WITHOUT 
HY-
DRANT 
GPM 

WITH 
HY-
DRANT 
GPM 

DESIGN 
AREA 
m2 

DESIGN 
DENSI-
TY 
mm/
min 

NON-RELIEVING TYPE CONTAINER OF SIZE ≤ 1 GAL. 

6.1 

1.8 

9.1 

5.5 

K ≥11.2/QR/
HT 
K ≥8.0/QR/
HT 

24.4 

186 

L – 2 

2000  

2500  

7.8 

139 

- 

500 

750  

NON-RELIEVING TYPE CONTAINER OF SIZE ≤ 5 GAL. 

Class IB/IC/II/
IIIA 

All Class 

Class IB/IC/II/
IIIA 

Rack 

Shelf 

Rack 

Pallet 

7.6 

1.5 

9.1 

5.5 

9.1 

Pallet 

2 

Class IIIB 

Rack 

12.2 

15.2 

Class IB/IC/II/
IIIA 

Pallet 

Rack 

Rack 

Pallet 

4.3 

7.6 

3.7 

5.5 

9.1 

9.1 

Class IIIB 

Rack 

12.2 

15.2 

Pallet 

5.5 

9.1 

 

 

K ≥8.0/QR/
HT 
K ≥8.0/QR/
HT 
K ≥11.2/QR/
HT 
K ≥8.0/QR/
HT 
K ≥8.0/QR/
HT 

K ≥11.2/QR/
HT 
K ≥8.0/QR/
HT 
K ≥11.2/QR/
HT 
K ≥8.0/QR/
HT 
K ≥8.0/QR/
HT 

5.5 

9.1 

278 
RELIEVING TYPE CONTAINER OF SIZE ≤ 5 GAL. 

10.5 

- 

- 

1000 

1250 

1500 

2000 

26.5 

186 

12.2 

278 

L – 3 

1500  

2000  

12.2 

278 

18.3 

278 

- 

- 

1250  

1500  

1500 

2000 

12.21 

186 

L – 4 

1500 

1500 

12.2 

278 

L-4,7 

1500 

2000 

24.2 

278 

- 

2000 

2500 

12.21 

186 

L-4,7 

1500 

1500 

10.5 

278 

- 

1000 

1250 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 635 of 1348 

 

Table 9.7.HH.: Water Miscible Flammable and Combustible Liquids in Metal Containers 

Liquid 

Storage 
Type 

Storage 
Height 
m 

Ceiling 
Height 
m 

Fire Water Sprinkler System Design 
Criteria 

Pump Capacity 

Ceiling 

Sprinkler 

In-rack 
Layout 

Without 
Hydrant 
gpm 

With 
Hydrant 
gpm 

Design 
Density 
mm/
min 

Design 
Area 
m2 

NON-RELIEVING TYPE CONTAINER OF SIZE >5 & ≤60 GAL. 

Class IB/IC/II/
IIIA 

Rack 

Pallet 

7.6 

1.5 

9.1 

5.5 

Class IIIB 

Rack 

12.2 

15.2 

16.3 

278 

L-5 

2000 

2500 

16.3 

278 

- 

1500 

1500 

12.21 

278 

L – 4 

1500 

2000 

K ≥11.2/
SR/HT 
K ≥11.2/
SR/HT 
K ≥8.0/SR/
HT 
K ≥8.0/SR/
HT 

K ≥11.2/
SR/HT 
K ≥8.0/SR/
HT 
K ≥11.2/
SR/HT 

Pallet 

5.5 
RELIEVING TYPE CONTAINER OF SIZE >5 & ≤60 

14.3 

278 

9.1 

- 

1250 

1500 

Class IB/IC/II/
IIIA 

Rack 

7.6 

Pallet 

2 

9.1 

9.1 

Class IIIB 

Rack 

12.2 

15.2 

Pallet 

5.5 

9.1 

K ≥11.2/
SR/HT 
K ≥11.2/
SR/HT 
K ≥8.0/SR/
HT 
K ≥8.0/SR/
HT 

24.4 

278 

L-6,7 

2500 

2500 

24.4 

278 

- 

2000 

2000 

12.21 

278 

L-4,7 

1500 

2000 

14.3 

278 

- 

1250 

1500 

RELIVING TYPE PORTABLE TANK & IBC 

Rack 

7.6 

9.1 

Rack 

12.2 

15.2 

24.4 

278 

L-5,7 

2500 

2500 

12.21 

278 

L-4,7 

1500 

2000 

Class IB/IC/II/
IIIA 

Class IIIB 

All Class 

Pallet 
UNSATURATED POLYESTER RESIN IN NON-RELIEVING METAL CONTAINER 

2 High 

24.4 

278 

9.1 

- 

2000 

2000 

All Class 

All 

3.1 

10.1 

K ≥11.2/
SR/HT 

18.3 

278 

- 

1500 

2000 

Container Size in US Gallons, Height in meters, Design Density in mm/min, Design area in Sq. meter. SH - Maxi-
mum Storage Height, CH - Maximum Ceiling Height, DD - Design Density, DA - Design Area, 

Note: (1) - Increase ceiling density to 24.4mm/min where more than one level of storage is over top in-rack level. 

(2). Refer to Table 9.7.KK. For Sprinkler layouts and Schemes. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 636 of 1348 

 

 

ITEMS 

56. DESIGN CRITE-

RIA FOR IN-
DOOR STORAGE 
OF FLAMMABLE 
AND COMBUS-
TIBLE              
LIQUIDS IN      
NON-METAL     
CONTAINERS 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

REQUIREMENTS 

i.  Water miscible flammable and combustible liquids with concentration less 
than 20% and stored in non-metal container shall be protected as Class IV 
commodity. 

ii.  Water miscible flammable and combustible liquids with concentration 20% to 
50% and stored in non-metal container shall be protected as Group A Plastic. 
iii. All other flammable and combustible liquids stored in non-metallic containers 

shall be protected as per Table 9.7.II. 

iv. The in-rack sprinkler design shall be based on the 6 most remote sprinklers for 

one level of in-rack sprinkler or 4 most remote sprinklers for top 2 levels if 
there are two levels or more levels of in-rack sprinklers. Demand per in-rack 
sprinkler shall be 60 gpm for Scheme S - A & S - B and 30 gpm for Scheme S - C.  

v.  In-rack sprinkler shall be Ordinary temperature quick response type. 
vi. Ceiling sprinkler shall be standard response type. 
vii. Plastic container shall not be permitted if protection criteria are not available 

as per Table 9.7.II, unless full scale fire test is carried out by listing body for 
protection criteria and approved by Dubai Civil Defense.  

viii.Refer to Table 9.7.KK. For Sprinkler layouts and Schemes. 

Table 9.7.II.: Flammable and Combustible Liquids in Non-Metallic Containers 

Liquid 

Stor-
age 
Type 

Storage 
Height 
m 

Ceiling 
Height 
m 

Ceiling 

Sprinkler 
Type 

In-rack 

Pump Capacity 

Schem
e 

Sprin
kler 
Type 

Without 
Hydrant 
gpm 

With 
Hydrant 
gpm 

Design 
Density 
mm/
min 

De-
sign 
Area 
m2 

WATER IMMISCIBLE LIQUID IN PLASTIC CONTAINER  OF SIZE ≤ 1 OZ PACKED IN DOUBLE CORRUGATED BOX  
Class IB/
IC/II/III 

Protection shall be as per NFPA 13 for Group A Unexpanded Plastic 

All 

WATER IMMISCIBLE LIQUID IN PLASTIC CONTAINER ≤ 5, CARTOONED / UN-CARTOONED 

Class IIIB 
(>93°C) 

Rack 

All 

All 

K8/OT/

SR 

8 

270 

K8 

S - A 

1250 

1500 

WATER IMMISCIBLE LIQUID IN FLEXIBLE PLASTIC LINER WITHIN A COMPOSITE CORRUGATED PAPERBOARD 

Class IIIB 
(>190°C) 

Rack 

All 

All 

270 

K5.
6 

S - C 

1000 

1250 

BOX OF SIZE ≤ 6 GAL 
K8/OT/

OF SIZE ≤ 275 GAL 
K8/OT/

SR 

SR 

8 

8 

WATER IMMISCIBLE LIQUID IN FLEXIBLE PLASTIC LINER CORRUGATE PAPERBOARD IBC                         

Class IIIB 
(>190°C) 

Rack 

8.5 

9.1 

270 

K5.
6 

S - C 

1000 

1250 

WATER MISCIBLE LIQUID IN PLASTIC CONTAINER  OF SIZE ≤ 1 GALLON CARTOONED 

Class IB/
IC//II/III 

Rack

1 

All 

All 

K8/OT/

SR 

8 

270 

K8 

S - B 

1250 

1500 

WATER MISCIBLE LIQUID IN PLASTIC CONTAINER  OF SIZE ≤ 60 GALLON CARTOONED / UNCARTONED 

Class IB/
IC/II/III 

Rack

1 

7.6 

9.1 

K8/OT/

SR 

18.3 

270 

K8 

S - B 

2000 

2000 

WATER MISCIBLE / IMMISCIBLE LIQUID IN LISTED / LABELED IBC CONTAINERS OF SIZE ≤ 793 GAL 

Class II/III 

Pallet  1 high 

9.1 

Class II/III 

Pallet  2 high 

9.1 

Class II/III 

Note: 

Rack

1 

7.6 

9.1 

K11.2/
HT/SR 
K11.2/
HT/SR 
K11.2/
OT/SR 

18.3 

278 

24.4 

278 

- 

- 

1250 

1500 

2000 

2500 

24.4 

270 

K8 

S - B 

2500 

2500 

1 - The aisle width must be minimum 2.4 meters & rack depth must be maximum 2.7 meters. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 637 of 1348 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

57. DESIGN CRITERIA 

FOR INDOOR 
STORAGE OF    
AEROSOL 

i.  Level 1 aerosol product shall be protected as a Class IV commodity. 
ii.  All other type of aerosol products shall be protected as per Table 9.7.JJ. 
iii. The in-rack sprinkler design shall be based on 8 sprinklers operation for one 

level of in-rack sprinkler, 12 sprinklers (6 at each top level) for two level of 
in-rack sprinklers, 18 sprinkler (6 at each top level) for more than two levels 
of in-rack sprinkler. The demand per in-rack sprinkler shall be 30 gpm for 
cartoned Storage and 45 gpm for non-cartoned Storage. 

iv. Plastic aerosol containers shall be limited to level 1 aerosol and aerosol with 

capacity less than 118 ml. 

v.  Encapsulated storage shall be treated as non-cartoned storage.  
vi. Shrink wrapping of carton shall be protected as cartoned storage.  
vii. Refer to Table 9.7.KK. For Sprinkler layouts and Schemes. 

Table 9.7.JJ.: Sprinkler Design criteria for Storage of Aerosols 

Aero-
sol 
Level 

Ceiling 
Height 
m 

Storage 
Height 
m 

Ceiling Sprinkler 

Inrack Sprinkler  Pump Capacity 

Sprinkler 

Design 
Densi-
ty 
mm/
min 

De-
sign 
Area 
m2 

Mini-
mum 
Pres-
sure 

Num-
ber of 
Sprin-
klers 

Sprin-
kler 

Lay-
out 

With-
out 
Hy-
drant 
gpm 

With 
Hy-
drant 
gpm 

CARTONED AEROSOLS IN PALLETIZED / SOLID PILE STORAGE CONFIGURATION 

2 

2 

2 
3 

3 

9.1 

9.1 

7.6 
9.1 

9.1 

4.6 

1.5 

6.1 
4.6 

1.5 

K 14  ESFR 
K ≥8.0/SR/

HT 

K 14 /ESFR 
K 14 /ESFR 
K ≥8.0/SR/

HT 

- 

12 

- 
- 

- 

3.4 

232 

- 

- 
- 

3.4 
5.2 

25 

232 

- 

12 

- 

12 
12 

- 

- 

- 

- 
- 

- 

7.6 

4.6 

K 14 /ESFR 

- 
UNCARTONED AEROSOLS IN PALLETIZED / SOLID PILE STORAGE CONFIGURATION 
- 
- 

K 14 /ESFR 
K 14 /ESFR 

5.2 
3.4 

9.1 
7.6 

3 

2 
2 

3.4 

12 

4.6 
4.6 

- 

- 
- 

- 

- 
- 

12 
12 

CARTONED AEROSOLS IN RACK STORAGE CONFIGURATION 

2 

2 

2 

2 
3 

3 

3 

All 

7.6 

9.1 

9.1 

9.1 
7.6 

9.1 

9.1 

All 

6.1 

7.6 

6.1 

4.6 
4.6 

7.6 

4.6 

All 

K 14 /ESFR 

K 14/ ESFR 

K ≥8.0/SR/

HT 

K 14 /ESFR 
K 14 /ESFR 

K 14 /ESFR 

K 14 /ESFR 
K ≥8.0/SR/

HT 

- 

- 

- 

- 

3.4 

3.4 

12 

232 

- 

- 
- 

- 

- 

- 
- 

- 

- 

3.4 
3.4 

3.4 

5.2 

12 

232 

- 

12 

12 

- 

12 
12 

12 

12 

- 

- 

K5.6/
QR/OT 
K5.6/
QR/OT 

- 
- 

K5.6/
QR/OT 

- 

- 

- 
- 

- 

- 

- 
- 

- 

1250 

1500 

1000 

1250 

1250 
1500 

1500 
2000 

2000 

2000 

1250 

1500 

1500 
1250 

2000 
1500 

1250 

1500 

L - 1 

2000 

2500 

L - 1 

1500 

2000 

- 
- 

1250 
1250 

1500 
1500 

L - 1 

2000 

2500 

- 

- 

1500 

2000 

K5.6/
QR/OT 

L - 8 

1500 

2000 

 
SR - Standard Response, FR - Fast Response, OT - Ordinary Temperature, HT - High Temperature, ESFR - Early Sup-
pression Fast Response,  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 638 of 1348 

 

Table 9.7.JJ.: Sprinkler Design criteria for Storage of Aerosols 

Aero-
sol 
Level 

Ceiling 
Height 
m 

Storage 
Height 
m 

Ceiling Sprinkler 

Inrack Sprinkler  Pump Capacity 

Sprinkler 

Design 
Densi-
ty 
mm/
min 

De-
sign 
Area 
m2 

Mini-
mum 
Pres-
sure 

Num-
ber of 
Sprin-
klers 

Sprin-
kler 

Lay-
out 

With-
out 
Hy-
drant 
gpm 

With 
Hy-
drant 
gpm 

UNCARTONED AEROSOLS IN RACK STORAGE CONFIGURATION 

2 

2 

3 

9.1 

9.1 

9.1 

4.6 

7.6 

7.6 

K 14 /ESFR 
K ≥8.0/SR/

HT 

K ≥8.0/SR/

HT 

- 

12 

12 

- 

5.2 

12 

- 

- 

1500 

2000 

232 

232 

- 

- 

- 

- 

K5.6/
QR/OT 
K5.6/
QR/OT 

L - 9 

1500 

2000 

L - 9 

1500 

2000 

ALL TYPE OF COOKING SPRAY PRODUCTS FOR ALL STORAGE CONFIGURATIONS 

- 

9.1 

7.6 

K 14 / ESFR 

  

  

5.2 

12 

- 

- 

1500 

2000 

SR - Standard Response, FR - Fast Response, OT - Ordinary Temperature, HT - High Temperature, ESFR - Early 
Suppression Fast Response,  
Refer to Table 9.7.KK. For Sprinkler layouts and Schemes. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 639 of 1348 

 

Table 9.7: Automatic Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

58. SPRINKLERS AND IN 

i.  Sprinklers and Inrack sprinklers schemes and layouts shall be in ac-

RACK SPRINKLERS 
SCHEMES AND LAYOUTS  

cordance with Table 9.7.KK. 

Table 9.7.KK.: Sprinkler and In rack sprinkler Schemes and Layouts 

SHEMES 

REQUIREMENTS 

SCHEMATIC 

1. SCHEME S-A  i.  The horizontal barrier shall be 10mm 

 

plywood or 22 gauge sheet metal. They 
shall be spaced as indicated in the figure. 
In-rack sprinkler shall be provided below 
each barrier level. 

ii.  Where adjacent rack bays are not dedi-
cated to storage of liquids, the barrier 
and in-rack sprinkler protection 
shall be extended at least 8 ft. (2.4 m) 
beyond the area devoted to liquid stor-
age including aisle. 

iii. In-rack sprinkler shall be ordinary tem-
perature and quick response type with 
minimum K Factor of 8.0. 

iv. In-rack sprinkler design shall be based on 
6 most remote sprinklers for one level of 
in-rack sprinkler or 4 most remote sprin-
klers for top 2 levels for two levels or 
more level of in-rack sprinklers.   

v.  Demand per sprinkler shall be 60 gpm  

i.  Horizontal barrier shall be 10 mm ply-
wood or 22 gauge sheet metal. They 
shall be spaced as indicated in the figure. 
ii.  In-rack sprinkler shall be provided below 

 

each barrier level. 

iii. Where adjacent rack bays are not dedi-
cated to storage of liquids, the barrier 
and in-rack sprinkler protection 
shall be extended at least 8 ft. (2.4 m) 
beyond the area devoted to liquid stor-
age including aisle. 

iv. In-rack sprinkler shall be ordinary tem-
perature and quick response type with 
minimum K Factor of 8.0. 

v.  In-rack sprinkler design shall be based on 
6 most remote sprinklers for one level of 
in-rack sprinkler or 4 most remote sprin-
klers for top 2 levels, if two levels or 
more level of in-rack sprinklers.  

vi. Demand per sprinkler shall be 60 gpm 

2. SCHEME S-B 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 640 of 1348 

 

Table 9.7.KK.: Sprinkler and In rack sprinkler Schemes and Layouts 

SHEMES 

REQUIREMENTS 

SCHEMATIC 

3. SCHEME S-C 

i.  Horizontal barrier shall be 10 mm ply-
wood or 22 gauge sheet metal. They 
shall be spaced as indicated in the figure. 
ii.  In-rack sprinkler shall be provided below 

 

each barrier level. 

iii. Where adjacent rack bays are not dedi-
cated to storage of liquids, the barrier 
and in-rack sprinkler protection 
shall be extended at least 8 ft. (2.4 m) 
beyond the area devoted to liquid stor-
age including aisle. 

iv. In-rack sprinkler shall be ordinary tem-
perature and quick response type with 
minimum K Factor of 8.0. 

v.  In-rack sprinkler design shall be based on 
6 most remote sprinklers for one level of 
in-rack sprinkler or 4 most remote sprin-
klers for top 2 levels, if two levels or 
more level of in-rack sprinklers.  

vi. Demand per sprinkler shall be 30 gpm.  

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 641 of 1348 

 

Table 9.7.KK.: Sprinkler and In rack sprinkler Schemes and Layouts 

SHEMES 

REQUIREMENTS 

SCHEMATIC 

4. LAYOUT L-1 

i.  The in-rack sprinkler configuration 

 

shall be as per the figure. 

ii.  The in-rack sprinkler calculation 

shall be for 8 sprinkler for one level 
of in-rack, 12 sprinklers, if two level 
of in-rack and 18 sprinklers if more 
than two level of in-rack.  

5. LAYOUT L-2 

i.  One line of in-rack sprinklers 6 ft. 

 

(1.8 m) above the floor and one 
line of in-rack sprinklers 12 ft. (3.6 
m) above the floor in the longitudi-
nal flue space, with sprinklers 
spaced not more than 10 ft. (3 m) 
on center.  

ii.  Sprinklers shall be vertically stag-

gered.  

6. LAYOUT L-3 

i.  One line of in-rack sprinklers in the 

 

longitudinal flue space at every 
storage level above the floor ex-
cept above the top tier, with sprin-
klers spaced not more than 10 ft. (3 
m) on center. 

ii.  Sprinklers shall be vertically stag-

gered, where more than one level 
of in-rack sprinklers is installed.  

7. LAYOUT L-4 

i.  One line of in-rack sprinklers in the 

 

longitudinal flue space at every 
other storage level, except above 
the top tier, beginning above the 
first storage level, with sprinklers 
spaced not more than 10 ft. (3 m) 
on center.  

ii.  Sprinklers shall be vertically stag-

gered, where more than one level 
of in-rack sprinklers is installed.  

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 642 of 1348 

 

Table 9.7.KK.: Sprinkler and In rack sprinkler Schemes and Layouts 

SHEMES 

REQUIREMENTS 

SCHEMATIC 

8. LAYOUT L-5 

9. LAYOUT L-6 

i.  One line of in-rack sprinklers in the lon-
gitudinal flue space at every storage lev-
el above the floor except above the top 
tier and face sprinklers at the first stor-
age level at each rack upright.  

ii.  In-rack sprinklers shall be spaced not 
more than 9 ft. (2.7 m) on center and 
shall be staggered vertically, where 
more than one level of in-rack sprinklers 
is installed.  

i.  One line of in-rack sprinklers in the lon-
gitudinal flue space at every other stor-
age level above the first storage level 
except the top tier and face sprinklers at 
the first storage level at each rack up-
right.  

ii.  In-rack sprinklers shall be spaced not 
more than 10 ft. (3 m) on center and 
shall be staggered vertically, where 
more than one level of in-rack sprinklers 
is installed.  

10. LAYOUT               

L-7 

i.  Based on the protection table and stor-
age arrangement this in-rack sprinkler 
arrangement shall be applicable.  

 

 

 

11. LAYOUT    

i.  The in-rack sprinkler configuration shall 

 

L-8 

be as per the figure. 

ii.  The in-rack sprinkler calculation shall be 
for 8 sprinklers, for one level of in-rack, 
12 sprinklers, for two level of in-rack and 
18 sprinklers for more than two level of 
in-rack. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 643 of 1348 

 

Table 9.7.KK.: Sprinkler and In rack sprinkler Schemes and Layouts 

SHEMES 

REQUIREMENTS 

SCHEMATIC 

12. LAYOUT    L-9 

i.  The in-rack sprinkler configuration 

 

shall be as per the figure. 

ii.  The in-rack sprinkler calculation shall 
be for 8 sprinklers, for one level of in
-rack, 12 sprinklers, if two levels of 
in-rack and 18 sprinklers if more 
than two levels of in-rack.  

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 644 of 1348 

3.   Details of Fire Protection Systems 

 
3.6.  Automatic Dry Sprinkler Systems 

 
3.6.1. 

 The requirements for Automatic Dry Sprinkler System material, design, installation 
shall be as per Table 9.8., Applicable Sprinkler requirements of Table 9.7. and the 
General Requirements of Table 9.3.   

Table 9.8: Automatic Dry Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. DEFINITION 

2. COMPO-
NENTS 

3. FIRE PUMP   

CAPACITY 

4. PIPES 

i.  A sprinkler system employing automatic sprinklers that are attached to a piping 
system containing air or nitrogen under pressure, the release of which (as from 
the opening of a sprinkler) permits the water pressure to open a valve known as a 
dry pipe valve, and the water then flows into the piping system and out the 
opened sprinklers.  

ii.  Freezers and Refrigerated spaces having an ambient temperature less than 4oC 

shall be provided with Dry Sprinkler Systems.  

i.  Fire Pumps, Controller, Fire Water Tank, Pipes, Fittings, Nitrogen/Air Supply , 

Sprinkler Heads, Isolation valves, Alarm Check valves (ACV), Floor Zone Control 
Valve (ZCV), Pressure gauge, Flow Switch, Test connection, Drains, Breeching inlet 
and Signs. 

i.  The fire pump set shall consist of 1 Electric driven pump, 1 diesel driven pump and 

1 electric Jockey pump, complete with controllers. 

ii.  The pump capacity shall be as per Section 4. 

i.  Where the sprinkler pipe passes through a wall or floor into the refrigerated 

space, a section of pipe arranged for removal shall be provided immediately inside 
the space. The removable length of the required pipe shall be a minimum of 762 
mm. 

ii.  The connection pipe from the air supply to the dry pipe valve shall not be less than 

15 mm in diameter and shall enter the system above the priming water level of 
the dry pipe valve. 

iii. The air supply piping shall be equipped with two easily removable supply lines at 

least 1.9 m long and at least 25.4 mm in diameter. 

5. PRESSURE 
GAUGES  

i.  The approved and Civil Defence listed Pressure gauges shall be installed                           
a. On the water side and air side of the dry pipe valve.                                                          
b. At the air receiver where one is provided.                                                                       
c. In each independent pipe from air supply to dry pipe system.                                   
d. At quick-opening devices 

6. SPRINKLERS 

7. DESIGN AREA 
AND DESIGN 
DENSITY. 

i.  Sprinklers shall be either listed dry type sprinklers or Upright Sprinklers. Standard 

or pendent sprinklers shall not be installed in Dry Systems. 

i.  The dry Sprinkler System Design area and the design densities shall be as per Ta-

ble 9.6.A. 

Table 9.8.A.: Design Area and Design Densities for Dry Sprinklers based on Occupancy Hazard 

HAZARD 

DESIGN DENSITY         
(mm/min) gpm/ft2 

AREA OF OPERATION 
( m2 ) Ft2 

WATER DEMAND ONLY 
FOR SPRINKLERS gpm 

1. Light Hazard  

2. Ordinary 1 Hazard  

(4.1) 0.10  

(6.1) 0.15  

3. Ordinary 2 Hazard  

(8.1.1) 0.20  

4. Extra Hazard Group 1  

(12.2) 0.30  

5. Extra Hazard Group 2 
 

(16.3) 0.40  

(181) 1950 

(181) 1950 

(181) 1950 

(300) 3250 

(300) 3250 

195 

290 

390 

975 

1300 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 645 of 1348 

 

Table 9.8.: Automatic Dry Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

8. SIZE OF THE 

DRY       
SPRINKLER   
SYSTEM 

i.  The system size shall be such that the initial water is discharged from the system 

test connection in not more than 60 seconds, starting at the normal air pressure on 
the system and at the time of the fully opened inspection test connection.  

9. GRIDDED      

i.  The dry pipe sprinkler system shall not be Gridded.  

SYSTEM 

10. LOCATION 

OF DRY 
PIPE 
VALVE 

3. AIR 

9. WATER      
DELIVERY  

HAZARD 

i.  The dry Sprinkler Valve shall not be located inside area where the temperature is 

below 40C. 

ii.  An indicating-type control valve for the operational testing of the system shall be 

provided on each sprinkler riser outside of the refrigerated space  

i.  Each dry pipe system shall have a dedicated and automatic air maintenance de-

vice. 

ii.  Air or nitrogen or other approved gas pressure shall be maintained on dry pipe 

systems throughout the year. 

iii.  The compressed air supply shall be from a source available at all times. 
iv.  Air or nitrogen supply for systems shall be one of the following.                                 

a. Air from the room with lowest temperature to reduce the moisture content.            
b. Air compressor/dryer package listed for the application utilizing an ambient air.         
c. Compressed nitrogen gas from cylinders used in lieu of compressed air 

v.  The air supply shall have a capacity capable of restoring normal air pressure in the 

system within 60 minutes. 

vi.  Each supply line shall be equipped with control valves located in the warm area. 
vii.  A check valve shall be installed in the air filling connection, and a listed or ap-
proved shutoff valve of either the renewable disc or ball valve type shall be in-
stalled on the supply side of this check valve and shall remain closed unless filling 
the system. 

viii. An approved relief valve shall be provided between the air supply and the shutoff 
valve and shall be set to relieve pressure no less than 10 psi (0.7 bar) in excess of 
system air pressure and shall not exceed the manufacturer’s limitations. 

ix.  The system air pressure shall be maintained in accordance with the instruction 

sheet furnished with the dry pipe valve, or shall be 20 psi (1.4 bar) in excess of the 
calculated trip pressure of the dry pipe valve, based on the highest normal water 
pressure of the system supply. 

x.  A check valve or other positive backflow prevention device shall be installed in the 

air supply to each system to prevent airflow or waterflow from one system to an-
other. 

xi.  A low air pressure alarm to a constantly attended location shall be in stalled. 

i.  Calculations for the dry pipe system water delivery shall be based on the hazard and 

shall comply with Table 9.8.B. 

Table 9.8.B.: Dry Pipe System Water Delivery 

NUMBER OF MOST REMOTE 
SPRINKLERS OPEN INITIALLY 

MAXIMUM TIME OF WATER  
DELIVERY 

1. Light Hazard  

2. Ordinary 1 Hazard  

3. Ordinary 2 Hazard  

4. Extra Hazard Group 1  

5. Extra Hazard Group 2 

 

1 

2 

2 

4 

4 

60 Seconds  

50 Seconds  

50 Seconds  

45 Seconds  

40 Seconds  

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 646 of 1348 

 

Figure 9.26: Typical Arrangement of Dry Sprinkler System for Refrigerated areas 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 647 of 1348 

3.7.  Automatic Pre-action System Sprinkler Systems 

 
3.7.1. 

 

 

 The requirements for Pre-action Automatic Sprinkler System material, design, in-
stallation shall be as per Table 9.9., Applicable Sprinkler requirements of Table 9.7. 
and the General Requirements of Table 9.3.   

Table 9.9: Automatic Pre-action Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. DEFINITION 

i.  A Pre-action System is a system which employs automatic and closed-type sprin-
kler heads connected to a piping system that contains air (either pressurized or 
non-pressurized), with a supplemental system of detection serving the same 
area as the sprinklers.  

ii.  These systems are typically used in applications where the accidental discharge 
of water would be catastrophic to the usage occupancy (for example; computer 
servers, lift machine rooms, telecommunications equipment, and high voltage 
electrical components).  

iii. Pre-action systems shall be any of the following types.                                                   

a. A single interlock system, which admits water to a sprinkler piping upon oper-
ation of detection devices.                                                                                                                
b. A double interlock system, which admits water to a sprinkler piping upon op-
eration of both detection devices and automatic sprinklers. 

2. COMPONENTS 

i.  Fire Pumps, Fire Water Tank, Pipes, Fittings, Nitrogen/Air Supply , Sprinkler 

Heads, Isolation valves, Pre-action Valve, Pressure gauge, Flow Switch, Test con-
nection, Drains, Breeching inlet, Signs. 

ii.  All components of pneumatic, hydraulic, or electrical systems shall be compati-

ble.  

3. FIRE PUMP   

CAPACITY 

4. PIPES 

5. VALVES 

6. PRESSURE 
GAUGES  

7. SPRINKLERS 

8. SIZE OF THE 

SYSTEM 

 

i.  The fire pump set shall consist of 1 Electric driven pump, 1 diesel driven pump 

and 1 electric Jockey pump, complete with controllers. 

ii.  The pump capacity shall be as per Section 4. 

i.  Where the sprinkler pipe passes through a wall or floor into the refrigerated 

space, a section of the pipe arranged for the removal shall be provided immedi-
ately inside the space. The removable length of the required pipe shall be a min-
imum of 762 mm. 

ii.  The connection pipe from the air supply to the dry pipe valve shall not be less 
than 15 mm in diameter and shall enter the system above the priming water 
level of the dry pipe valve. 

iii. The air supply piping shall be equipped with two easily removable supply lines 

at least 1.9 m long and at least 25.4 mm in diameter. 

i.  The automatic water control valve shall be provided with hydraulic, pneumatic, 
or mechanical manual means for an operation that is independent of the detec-
tion devices and of the sprinklers. 

i.  The approved and Civil Defence listed Pressure gauges shall be installed                           
a. Above and below the pre-action valve.                                                                                   
b. On air supply to the pre-action valve. 

i.  Sprinklers shall be either listed dry type sprinklers or Upright Sprinklers and Hor-

izontal sprinklers. 

i.  Not more than 1000 automatic sprinklers shall be controlled by one Single inter-

locked pre-action valve. 

ii.  Double interlocked System size shall be designed to deliver water to test the 

connection in no more than 60 seconds.  

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 648 of 1348 

 

Table 9.9: Automatic Pre-action Sprinkler System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

9. GRIDDED     

SYSTEM 

i.  The pre-action pipe sprinkler system shall not be Gridded.  

10. LOCATION OF          

i.  The pre-action Sprinkler Valve shall not be located inside area where tempera-

ture is below 40C. 

ii.  An indicating-type control valve for operational testing of the system shall be 
provided on each sprinkler riser outside of the refrigerated space, when refrig-
erated spaces are protected. 

i.  The fire detection and alarm system for the pre-action system shall comply with 

Chapter 8. Fire Detection and Alarm Systems. 

ii.  Detectors shall be of electric or pneumatic fixed temperature type with temper-

ature ratings less than those of the sprinklers. 

iii. Detection devices shall not be rate-of-rise type. 

i.  Each Pre-action system shall have a dedicated and automatic air maintenance 

device. 

ii.  Air, nitrogen or other approved gas pressure shall be maintained on dry pipe 

systems throughout the year. 

iii.  The compressed air supply shall be from a source available at all times. 
iv.  Air or nitrogen supply for systems shall be one of the following.                                 

a. Air from the room with the lowest temperature to reduce the moisture con-
tent.                                                                                                                                                    
b. Air compressor/dryer package listed for the application utilizing ambient air.         
c. Compressed nitrogen gas from cylinders used in lieu of compressed air 

v.  The air supply shall have a capacity capable of restoring normal air pressure in 

the system within 60 minutes. 

vi.  Each supply line shall be equipped with control valves located in the warm ar-

ea. 

vii.  A check valve shall be installed in the air filling connection, and a listed or ap-

proved shutoff valve of either the renewable disc or ball valve type shall be 
installed on the supply side of this check valve and shall remain closed unless 
filling the system. 

viii. An approved relief valve shall be provided between the air supply and the 

shutoff valve and shall be set to relieve pressure no less than 10 psi (0.7 bar) in 
excess of system air pressure and shall not exceed the manufacturer’s limita-
tions. 

ix.  All pre-action system shall maintain a minimum supervising air or nitrogen 

pressure of 7 psi (0.5 bar). 

x.  A check valve or other positive backflow prevention device shall be installed in 
the air supply to each system to prevent airflow or waterflow from one system 
to another. 

xi.  A low air pressure alarm to a constantly attended location shall be in stalled. 

PRE-ACTION 
SYSTEM 
VALVE 

11. FIRE             
DETECTION 
SYSTEM 

12. AIR 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 649 of 1348 

 

Figure 9.27: Typical Arrangement of Single Inter locked Pre-action System 

Figure 9.28: Typical Arrangement of Double Inter locked Pre-action System 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 650 of 1348 

3.8.  Deluge Water Spray Systems 

 
3.8.1. 

 

 

 The requirements for Deluge Water Spray System material, design, installation 
shall be as per Table 9.10., Applicable Sprinkler requirements of Table 9.7. and the 
General Requirements of Table 9.3.   

Table 9.10: Automatic Deluge Water Spray System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. DEFINITION 

2. COMPONENTS 

i.  A water spray system is a special fixed pipe system connected to a reliable sup-
ply of fire protection water and equipped with water spray nozzles for specific 
water discharge and distribution over the surface or area to be protected. The 
piping system is connected to a water supply through a deluge valve that can 
be actuated both automatically and manually to initiate the flow of water. Au-
tomatic system actuation valves for spray systems can be actuated electrically 
by the operation of automatic detection equipment, such as heat detectors, 
relay circuits, and gas detectors, or mechanically by hydraulic or pneumatic 
systems, depending on the operating mode of the individual valves.  

ii.   The Deluge System application could be to extinguish  fires, control burning, 
fire exposure protection (Cooling) or prevention of fire. The pattern of the wa-
ter spray discharged from spray nozzles onto a surface may be elliptical or Cir-
cular, and the cross section of the projected discharge is conical. The water 
spray is forcefully directed onto the object or surface being protected. The 
pattern of spray nozzle discharge must carry water spray over the distance be-
tween the nozzle and the target, compensate for wind and draft conditions, 
and effectively hit the surface to be protected. The required discharge density 
in gpm/ft2 (L/min/m2) and complete coverage of the area to be protected are 
also essential elements. 

iii. LPG Tanks, Flammable Gas/Liquid Tanks, Electrical Hazards such as transform-

ers, Oil switches, motors, cable trays/ Trenches, Service Tunnels, Transport 
Tunnels and other such hazards shall be provided with Deluge Water Spray Sys-
tem. 

i.  Fire Pumps, Controller, Fire Water Tank, Pipes, Fittings, Nitrogen/Air Supply , 

Spray Nozzles, Isolation valves, Deluge Valve,  Pressure gauge, Flow Switch, 
Test connection, Drains, Breeching inlet and Signs. 

ii.  All components of pneumatic, hydraulic, or electrical systems shall be compati-

ble, listed and approved by Civil Defence. 

iii. System components shall be rated for the maximum working pressure to which 

they are exposed, but not less than 12.1 bar (175 psi). 

3. FIRE PUMPS 

i.  The fire pump set shall consist of 1 Electric driven pump, 1 diesel driven pump 

and 1 electric Jockey pump, complete with controllers. 

ii.  The pump capacity shall be as per Section 4. 

4. WATER SPRAY 

NOZZLES 

i.  Nozzles shall be open, listed and approved. 
ii.  Selection of nozzles shall be based on discharge characteristics, hazard evalua-
tion, ambient conditions and manufacturer’s instructions regarding positioning 
and coverage. 

5. DELUGE VALVE 

i.  The deluge System actuation valve shall be located as close to hazard protected 

as possible upon evaluation of hazard factors such as radiant heat flux, poten-
tial explosions, accessibility, discharge time and, drainage arrangement such as 
dikes, bund walls, trenches etc. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 651 of 1348 

 

Table 9.10: Automatic Deluge Water Spray System  

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

6. ELECTRICAL 
CLEARANCE 

i.  All system components shall be located so as to maintain the minimum electrical 
clearances from live parts. The clearance distance shall comply with Table 9.10.A. 

Table 9.10.A.: Clearance from Water Spray Equipment to Live Uninsulated Electrical Component 

NOMINAL SYSTEM 
VOLTAGE 
kV 

1. Up to 13.8  

2. 23  

3. 34.5  

4. 46  

5. 69 

6. 115 

7.138 

8. 161 

9. 230 

10. 345 

11. 500 

12. 765 

MAXIMUM SYSTEM 
VOLTAGE 
kV 

DESIGN BASIC IMPULSE 
LEVEL (BIL) 
kV 

MNIMUM CLEARANCE OF 
WWATER SPRAY        
EQUIPMENT 

14.5 

24.3 

36.5 

48.3 

72.5 

121 

145 

169 

242 

362 

550 

800 

110 

150 

200 

250 

350 

550 

650 

750 

178 mm 

254 mm 

330 mm 

432 mm 

635 mm 

1067 mm 

1270 mm 

1473 mm 

900/ 1050 

1050/ 1300 

1500/1800 

2050 

1930 mm/ 2134 mm 

2134 mm/ 2642 mm 

3150 mm/ 3658 mm 

4242 mm 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 652 of 1348 

Table 9.10: Automatic Deluge Water Spray System  

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

7. PIPING    

SUPPORT 

i.  The system piping shall be supported to maintain its integrity under fire conditions. 
ii.  The piping shall be supported from steel or concrete structural members or pipe 

stands. 

iii. Pipe stands used to support piping shall be in accordance with Table 9.10.B to deter-

mine maximum heights for pipe stands supporting various diameters of looped piping. 

iv. The distance between stands shall be as per Table 9.10.C. 
v.  Pipe stands shall be constructed of Schedule 40 threaded pipe, malleable iron flange 

base, and shall have a threaded cap top. 

vi. Pipe stands shall be anchored to a concrete pier or footing with either drop-in an-

chors, quick bolts, or cast-in-place J hooks. 

vii. The piping shall be attached to the pipe stand with U-bolts or equivalent attachment. 
viii.The piping shall be supported and braced to restrict movement due to nozzle reac-

tion and water surges so that system performance and integrity is maintained. 

ix. Hangers shall comply with Table 9.7.30. 

Table 9.10.B.: Maximum Pipe stand Heights 

DIAMETER OF 
PIPE 

PIPE STAND 
DIAMETER 
40 mm 

PIPE STAND 
DIAMETER 
50 mm 
 

PIPE STAND DI-
AMETER 
65 mm 

PIPE STAND 
DIAMETER 
80 mm 

PIPE STAND DI-
AMETER 
100 mm 

1. 40 mm  

2. 50 mm 

3. 65 mm 

4. 80 mm 

5. 100 mm 

LOOP SIZE 

1. 25 mm  

2. 40 mm 

3. 50 mm 

4. 65 mm 

3048 mm 

2438 mm 

1829 mm 

 

 

4267 mm 

3658 mm 

3048 mm 

2438 mm 

 

5486 mm 

4876 mm 

4267 mm 

3658 mm 

 

8534 mm 

7925 mm 

7315 mm 

6705 mm 

 

9144 mm 

9144 mm 

9144 mm 

9144 mm 

3048 mm 

Table 9.10.C.: Pipe Stand Distance 

DISTANCE BETWEEN PIPE STANDS 

3048 mm 

3658 mm 

4267 mm 

4572 mm 

 

Figure 9.30: Typical Arrangement of Support legs for Pipe Stands 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 653 of 1348 

 

Table 9.10: Automatic Deluge Water Spray System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

8. DRAINAGE 

i.  All water spray system pipe and fittings shall be installed so that the system can 

be drained. 

ii.  Drains shall discharge to a safe location, and drain valves, where provided, shall 

be accessible. 

iii. Drains shall not be directly interconnected with any sewer systems. 

9. FIRE DETECTION 

AND ALARM 
SYSTEM 

i.  The selection, location, and spacing of automatic fire detectors for the actuation 

of fixed water spray systems shall comply with Chapter 8. Fire Detection and 
Alarm Systems. 

ii.  The detection equipment requiring protection from the weather shall be provid-

ed with a canopy, hood, or other suitable protection. 

iii. Detectors shall be located so that no portion of the hazard being protected ex-

tends beyond the perimeter line of detectors. 

iv. When located out of doors or in the open, the spacing of fixed temperature or 

rate-of-rise detectors shall be reduced by at least 50 percent from the listed 
spacing under smooth ceilings. 

v.  Any flow from a single automatic nozzle of the smallest orifice size installed on 

the system or flow from any group of nonautomatic nozzles, shall result in an 
audible alarm on the premises within 90 seconds after flow begins. 

vi. Where a separate detection system is used to activate the water spray system, 
the alarm shall be actuated independently of the system water flow to indicate 
the operation of the detection system. 

vii. The flammable gas detectors and radiant energy sensing fire detectors shall be 

installed as per their listing specifications. 

i.  Where pilot sprinklers are used for fire detection in indoor locations, the maxi-

mum horizontal spacing shall not exceed 3.7 m. 

ii.  Pilot sprinklers located outdoors, such as in open process structures, shall be 

spaced such that the elevation of a single level of pilot sprinklers and between 
additional levels of pilot sprinklers shall not exceed 5.2 m. 

iii. The horizontal distance between pilot sprinklers installed outdoors shall not 

exceed 2.5 m. 

iv. Pilot sprinklers shall be installed as per their listing specifications in special situa-

tions. 

i.  At least one manual actuation device independent of the manual actuation de-

vice at the system actuation valve shall be installed for all automatic systems 
installed in occupied areas. 

i.  Breeching inlet connections shall be provided for all water spray systems, except 

for ultra high-speed water spray systems. 

i.  Pressure gauges shall be installed  below and above the Deluge Valve, below the 

system actuation valve and on air or water supply to pilot lines.  

i.  Strainers shall be provided for all water spray systems so as to be accessible for 

cleaning and flushing. 

10. PILOT        

SPRINKLERS 

11. REMOTE 

MANUAL   
ACTIVATION 

12. BREECHING 

INLET 

13. GAUGES 

14. STRAINERS  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 654 of 1348 

 

Table 9.10: Automatic Deluge Water Spray System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

15. DESIGN 

i.  The system and water supplies shall be designed to admit water into the piping and 

to discharge effective water spray from all open nozzles without delay. 
ii.  Tapping from wet risers to feed deluge system shall not be permitted. 
iii.  Manual operation shall be permitted where automatic operation of the system pre-

sents a hazard to personnel and trained personnel are available to operate such 
manual systems. 

iv.  Nozzle spacing (vertically or horizontally) shall not exceed 3 m. 
v.  A single system shall not protect more than one fire area. 
vi.  The hydraulically designed discharge rate for a single system or multiple systems 
designed to operate simultaneously shall not exceed the available water supply.  

vii.  Extinguishment of fires by water spray shall be accomplished by one or a combina-

tion of the following methods:                                                                                                                   
a. Surface cooling     b. Smothering by produced steam          c. Emulsification                                                                                                                                      
d. Dilution                  e. Other factors 

viii. Design Densities for various hazards, when demanded by other sections of this code 

or by Civil Defence hazard evaluation shall be as per Table 9.10.D. The duration of 
Discharge shall not be less than 60 minutes. 

ix.  All Deluge Water Spray Systems shall be hydraulically designed along with the manu-

facturer’s instructions. 

Table 9.10.D.: Water Spray Design Densities and Criteria 

HAZARD, 

REQUIRED DESIGN  
DENSITY 

OTHER REQUIREMENTS 

1. Cable - Spread/ Trenches/

Trays/Cable runs 

12.2 lpm (0.30 gpm)  Air Sampling Type smoke detection for smol-

dering fire sensing shall be provided. 

2. Belt Conveyors 

10.2 lpm (0.25 gpm) 

3. Conveyor Belt 

10.2 lpm (0.25 gpm) 

 

 

4. Pumps, Compressors han-
dling Flammable Liquids 

5. Flammable Liquid pool fires 

6. Vessels Exposure protection 

(LPG/ Flammable Liquid/ 
Gas Tanks,  

7. Structural Steel Exposure 

protection 

8. Vertical Structural Steel    

Exposure protection 

Interlocks shall be provided between the de-
tection system and the machinery to shut 
down belt conveyor operation, including up-
stream feed. 

The water spray system shall be installed to 
automatically wet the top belt, its contents, 
and the bottom return belt. 

See Chapter 13. Flammable Liquids 

See Chapter 13. Flammable Liquids 

10.2 lpm (0.25 gpm)  Water spray shall be applied to top and 

4.1 lpm (0.10 gpm) 

bottom surfaces of vertical vessels. See also 
Chapter 13. Flammable Liquids 

Horizontal, stressed (primary) structural steel 
members shall be protected. 

10.2 lpm (0.25 gpm)  A vertical structural steel that has been en-
cased in fire-resistant insulating material to 
provide a desired level of fire resistance, does 
not need not be protected with a water spray 
system. 

9. Transformers 

10.2 lpm (0.25 gpm) 

The water shall be applied to a projected area 
of rectangular prism envelope for the trans-
former and its appurtenances. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 655 of 1348 

Table 9.10: Automatic Deluge Water Spray System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

16. WATER 

DEMAND 

i.  The water supply must be adequate to supply the operating water spray system(s) 
with the required gpm (L/min) at effective pressure. Water spray systems adjacent 
to the hazard initially protected may require additional water. 

ii.  The water supply should be able to supply hose streams simultaneously. The total 
required water supply pressure and flow rates should be considered when the sys-
tem is designed.  

iii. The duration of the required discharge varies according to the nature of the hazard, 
the purpose for which the system is designed, and other factors that can be evaluat-
ed only for each installation.  

 

Figure 9.31.: Typical Deluge Water Spray System Application for LPG Tank. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 656 of 1348 

3.9.  Foam Sprinkler/Deluge/Discharge Systems 

 
3.9.1. 

 The requirements for Foam Sprinkler/ Deluge/ Discharge System material, design, 
installation shall be as per Table 9.11., Applicable Sprinkler requirements of Table 
9.7. and the General Requirements of Table 9.3.   

Table 9.11: Foam Sprinkler/ Deluge/ Pourer System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. DEFINITION 

2. COMPONENTS 

i.  Foam is produced by mixing a foam concentrate with water at the appropriate 
concentration, and then aerating and agitating the solution to form the bubble 
structure. Some foams are thick and viscous and form tough and, heat-resistant 
blankets over burning liquid surfaces and vertical areas. Other foams are thin-
ner and spread more rapidly. Some foams are capable of producing a vapor-
sealing film of surface-active water solution on a liquid surface. Some, such as 
medium- or high-expansion foam, are meant to be used as large volumes of 
wet gas cells for inundating surfaces and filling cavities. 

ii.  The process of producing and applying fire-fighting air-foams to hazards re-

quires three separate operations, each of which consumes energy.                                         
a. The proportioning process                                                                                                 
b. The foam generation phase                                                                                               
c. The distribution method. 

iii. Foam agent can be discharged through various arrangement of Systems such as 
Foam-water Sprinkler Systems, Foam-water Deluge  Spray Systems, Foam pour-
ing System, Foam monitor Systems etc. See Section  1.5 for definitions. 

i.  Fire Pumps, Controller, Foam concentrate pumps, Fire Water Tank, Foam con-
centrate Bladder Tank, Foam proportioning System, Pipes, Fittings, Sprinklers/
Spray Nozzles, Isolation valves, Deluge Valve,  Pressure gauge, Flow Switch, Test 
connection, Drains, Breeching inlet and Signs. 

ii.  All the components of Foam Systems including the used water shall be compati-

ble with the foam concentrate and foam solution and listed and approved by 
Civil Defence. 

iii. All foam solutions and type of systems applied to hazard shall be as per the 

manufacturer’s specifications and Material Safety Data Sheet. 

iv. The System components shall be rated for the maximum working pressure to 

which they are exposed, but not less than 12.1 bar (175 psi). 

3. FIRE PUMPS 

i.  The fire Pump set shall consist of 1 Electric driven pump, 1 diesel driven pump 

and 1 electric Jockey pump, complete with controllers. 

ii.  The pump capacity shall be as per Section 4. 

4. FOAM           

CONCENTRATE 

i.  Foam concentrates shall be from single manufacturer and single composition. 

Foam concentrates from different manufacturers, or different brands of the 
same manufacturer shall not be mixed. 

ii.  Storage tanks material, methods, storage temperature and other specifications 

shall be as per the manufacturer’s instructions. 

iii. Water-soluble and certain flammable and combustible liquids and polar sol-

vents that are destructive to nonalcohol-resistant foams shall require the use of 
alcohol-resistant foams.  

5. FOAM SYSTEM 

LOCATION  

i.  Foam equipment, proportioner, pumps, control valves shall be as close to haz-

ard they are protecting as possible, without compromising the safety of the 
equipment and of the personnel operating such systems. 

6. FOAM       

STRAINERS 

i.  Civil Defence listed strainers, having perforations not larger than  the smallest 
spray orifice and not less than 3.2 mm shall be installed , so as to be accessible 
for cleaning and flushing while maintaining the system discharge during activa-
tion. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 657 of 1348 

 

Table 9.11: Foam Sprinkler/ Deluge/ Pourer System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

7. TEST              

CONNECTIONS 

i.  System test connections shall be sized to accommodate both the low flow of the 

proportioner and the maximum anticipated flow through the proportioner. 

8. LOW                    

EXPANSION 
FOAM 

 
ALSO SEE TABLE 

i.  Design criteria for above the surface application with fixed foam discharge out-

let for Fixed-Roof Storage tanks containing Hydrocarbons shall comply with 
Table 9.11.A  and Table 9.11.E.  

 

9.11.13.,                  
DESIGN                      
CRITERIA  

9. FOAM WATER 

SPRINKLER 

10.  FOAM 

HANDLINE 
AND                    
MONITOR 
PROTECTION 

i.  Design densities, design area and duration of foam water sprinkler and foam 
water spray applications for indoor storage of water miscible liquids with con-
centration ≤ 50% and Immiscible Liquids in metal container, shall be as per   
Table 9.11.B.  

ii.  For in-rack sprinkler layout and schemes in Table 9.11.B  refer to Table 9.7.KK  
iii.  Design criteria for Foam water sprinkler system for processes and activities 

handling flammable and combustible liquids shall comply with Table 9.11.C.  

i.  Design criteria for Foam Handline and Monitor protection for Fixed-Roof Stor-

age tanks containing Hydrocarbons shall comply with Table 9.11.D.  

ii.  Foam Monitor nozzles shall not be considered as the primary means of protec-

tion for fixed-roof tanks over 18 m (60 ft.) in diameter.  

iii.  Foam handlines shall not be permitted to be used as the primary means of pro-
tection for fixed-roof tanks over 9 m (30 ft.) in diameter or those over 6 m (20 
ft.) in height.  

iv.  The design Criteria of Foam Monitor System for Loading Racks (Truck or Rail 

cars at loading and unloading) shall comply with Table 9.11.G.  

Table 9.11.A.: Discharge Time and Application Rate for Type II Fixed Foam Discharge Outlet of Outdoor 

Aboveground Storage Tank Containing Hydrocarbon  

HAZARD 

1. Fixed roof storage tank contain-

ing hydrocarbon with flash 
point below 37°C or liquids 
heated above their flash point.  

2. Fixed roof storage tank contain-

ing hydrocarbon with flash 
point between 37.8°C and 60°C 
(100°F and 140°F).  

REQUIRED  DESIGN                      
DENSITY 
 

DESIGN       
AREA 
m2 

ADDITIONAL 
FOAM FOR         
HYDRAULIC 
IMBALANCE 

FOAM             
CAPACITY 
DURATION 

4.1 lpm  
(0.10 gpm) 

Entire tank 
surface 

10% 

55 minutes 

4.1 lpm  
(0.10 gpm) 

Entire tank 
surface 

10% 

30 minutes 

3.  Fixed roof storage tank contain-

ing crude petroleum.  

4.1 lpm 
 (0.10 gpm) 

Entire tank 
surface 

10% 

55 minutes 

4. Floating roof storage tank con-

taining hydrocarbon.  

Follow NFPA 11 

Follow             
NFPA 11 

Follow               
NFPA 11 

Follow             
NFPA 11 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 658 of 1348 

 

Table 9.11.B.: Design Criteria for Foam Water Sprinkler/Deluge/Spray Systems For Indoor Storage of 
Water Miscible Liquids with more than 50% concentration and Immiscible Liquids in Metal Container 

Storage 

Type 

Storage 
Height 

m 

Ceiling 
Height 

m 

Foam Water Sprinkler System  

Pump Capacity 

Design Criteria 

Ceiling 

Sprinkler 

Design 
Density 

gpm 

Design 

Area 
m2 

In-rack 
Layout 

Without 
Hydrant 

gpm 

With  

Hydrant 

gpm 

NON-RELIEVING TYPE CONTAINER OF SIZE ≤ 5 GAL. STORING CLASS IB / IC/II/IIIA 
Rack 

12.2 

186 

L-3 

1250  

1500 

7.6 

9.1 

Palletized 

3.4 

9.1 

K ≥8.0/QR/HT 
K ≥11.2/QR/
HT 

16.3 

278 

- 

1500  

1500  

RELIEVING TYPE CONTAINER OF SIZE ≤ 5 GAL. STORING CLASS IB / IC/II/IIIA 
Rack 

K ≥8.0/QR/HT 

12.2 

186 

7.6 

9.1 

L-4 

1250  

1500  

NON-RELIEVING TYPE CONTAINER OF SIZE >5 & ≤60 GAL. STORING CLASS IB / IC/II/IIIA 
Rack 

K ≥8.0/SR/HT 

12.2 

278 

L-3 

7.6 

9.1 

Palletized 

1.9 

9.1 

K ≥8.0/SR/HT 

12.2 

278 

- 

RELIEVING TYPE CONTAINER OF SIZE >5 & ≤60 GAL. STORING CLASS IB / IC/II/IIIA 
Rack 

K ≥8.0/SR/HT 

12.2 

278 

7.6 

9.1 

L-4 

Palletized 

Palletized 

1.9 

4.1 

9.1 

10 

K ≥8.0/SR/HT 

K ≥11.2/SR/HT 

12.2 

24.2 

278 

278 

- 

- 

RELIEVING & NON-RELIEVING TYPE CONTAINER OF SIZE ≤60 GAL. STORING CLASS IIIB 
Rack 

K ≥8.0/SR/HT 

12.2 

15.2 

12.2 

186 

L-4 

1500  

1250  

1500  

1250  

2000  

2000  

1500  

2000  

1500  

2500  

1250  

1500  

RELIVING TYPE PORTABLE TANK & IBC 
Rack 

7.6 

9.1 

K ≥8.0/SR/HT 

12.2 

278 

L-4 

1500  

2000  

2 High 

Pelletized 
Note:  
i.  The in-rack sprinkler design shall be based on the 8 most remote sprinklers for one level of in-rack 

K ≥8.0/SR/HT 

1250 G 

1500  

12.2 

278 

9.1 

- 

sprinklers or 6 most remote sprinklers for top 2 levels if two levels of in-rack sprinklers or 6 most 
remote sprinklers for top 3 levels if three or more level of in-rack sprinklers.  

ii.  The demand per in-rack sprinkler shall be 30 gpm.  
iii.  The in-rack sprinkler shall be K 5.6 quick response (QR) ordinary temperature type.  
iv.  For in-rack sprinkler layout and schemes refer to Table 9.7.KK. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 659 of 1348 

 

HAZARD 

Table 9.11.C.: Design Criteria for Foam Water Sprinkler for processes and activities                                

handling flammable and combustible Liquids 

DESIGN 
REQUIRED  
DESIGN                      
AREA 
m2 
DENSITY 
 

FOAM 
CONCEN-
TRATE 
DURATION 

PUMP           
CAPACITY 
WITHOUT            
HYDRANT 
gpm 

PUMP    
CAPACITY 
WITH              
HYDRANT 
gpm 

1. LOADING AND UNLOADING AREA 

2. INDOOR STORAGE OF LIQUIDS IN 
ATMOSPHERIC STORAGE TANKS  

3.  SPRAY APPLICATION USING   

FLAMMABLE COMBUSTIBLE        
LIQUIDS 

4. POWDER COATING APPLICATION 

6.1 lpm  
(0.16 gpm) 

12.2 lpm  
(0.35 gpm) 

6.1 lpm  
(0.16 gpm) 

6.1 lpm  
(0.16 gpm) 

465 m2 

15 Minutes  1000 

1250  

465 m2 

15 Minutes  1500  

2000 

465 m2 

15 Minutes  1000 

1250  

465 m2 

15 Minutes  1000 

1250  

5. AIRCRAFT HANGER  (REFER TO  

TABLE 9.27.17) 

REFER TO NFPA 
409 AND TABLE 
9.27.17. 

 

 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 660 of 1348 

 

Table 9.11: Foam Sprinkler/ Deluge/ Pourer System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

11. DRAINAGE 

i.  Facilities shall be provided for the safe removal or retention of the largest antici-
pated flammable liquid spill plus the free water reaching the floor from the fixed 
fire protection system, as well as the discharge from hose streams.  

12. PRECAUTION 

13. FOAM         

WATER   
SPRINKLER, 
PRE-ACTION, 
DRY PIPE 
SYSTEM 

i.  Application of foam through solid streams that plunge into the flammable liquid 

could result as the source of ignition of the ensuing fire. The ignitions could be 
because of static discharges resulting from splashing and turbulence. Therefore, 
any application of foam to an unignited flammable liquid should be as gentle as 
possible. Correct application methods include a spray pattern or banking the 
foam stream off a backboard so that the foam flows gently onto the liquid sur-
face.  

ii.  Foam solutions are conductive and therefore not recommended for use on elec-
trical fires. If foam is used, a spray is less conductive than a straight stream. How-
ever, because foam is cohesive and contains materials that allow water to con-
duct electricity, foam spray is more conductive than water spray. 

i.  The system piping shall be hydraulically designed to obtain reasonably uniform 

foam and water distribution and to allow for loss of head in system piping. 

ii.  Sprinkler spacing shall not exceed 9.3 m2  per sprinkler. 
iii. The spacing between the branch line shall not exceed 3.7 m2. 
iv. The temperature rating of the sprinklers shall be within the range of 121°C to 

149°C (250°F to 300°F) where they are located at the roof or ceiling.  

v.  Where sprinklers are located at an intermediate level, the temperature rating 

shall be within the range of 57°C to 77°C (135°F to 170°F), unless ambient condi-
tions require a higher rating.  

vi. A minimum of 3% foam-water solution shall be discharged. 
vii.The foam sprinkler system shall also comply with Section 3.5. Wet Sprinkler Sys-

tem. 

viii.The foam pre-action sprinkler System shall also comply with Section 3.7. Pre-

action Sprinkler System. 

ix. The foam dry sprinkler system shall also comply with Section 3.6. Dry Sprinkler 

System. 

x.  The foam system shall  have a provision for manual operation. 

Figure 9.33.: Typical Foam Water Sprinkler System for Diesel Generator Room 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 661 of 1348 

 

Table 9.11: Foam Sprinkler/ Deluge/ Pourer System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

14. FOAM WATER     

DELUGE          
SYSTEM 

i.  The foam Water Deluge System shall comply with Section 3.8. Deluge Water 

Spray System. 

ii.  The system piping shall be hydraulically designed to obtain a reasonably uni-
form foam and water distribution and to allow for the loss of head in water 
supply piping. 

iii. an automatic Fire detection in compliance with Chapter 8. Fire Detection and 
Alarm System shall be used for fixed systems except for certain outdoor situa-
tions where manually triggered systems can be acceptable based on hazard 
evaluation.  

iv. A minimum of 3% foam-water solution shall be discharged. 
v.  A piping carrying foam solution shall be sized as if carrying plain water. 
vi. The foam Water Deluge System shall  have provision for manual operation. 

Figure 9.34.: Typical Foam Water Deluge System for Flammable Liquid Storage 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 662 of 1348 

 

Table 9.11: Foam Sprinkler/ Deluge/ Pourer System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

15. DESIGN                     

i.  Design Criteria for above the surface application with fixed foam discharge 

CRITERIA FOR 
LOW –
EXPANSION 
FOAM SYSTEM 

outlet for Fixed-Roof Storage tanks containing Hydrocarbons shall comply with 
Table 9.11.A  and Table 9.11.E.  

ii.  Low-expansion foam shall be provided to protect outdoor storage tanks, interi-
or flammable liquid hazards, loading racks, diked areas and non-diked spill are-
as. 

iii. Foam Monitor nozzles shall not be considered as the primary means of protec-

tion for fixed-roof tanks over 18 m (60 ft.) in diameter. 

iv. Foam handlines shall not be permitted to be used as the primary means of 

protection for fixed-roof tanks over 9 m (30 ft.) in diameter or those over 6 m 
(20 ft.) in height. 

v.  Fixed foam outlets shall not be used to protect horizontal or pressure tanks. 
vi. For the protection of a flammable liquid contained in a vertical fixed-roof 

(cone) atmospheric storage tank, discharge outlets shall be attached to the 
tank. 

vii. Where two or more discharge outlets are required, the outlets shall be spaced 

equally around the periphery of the tank, individually piped and separately 
valved for isolation outside the dike area. 

viii.Fixed foam discharge outlets shall be attached at the top of the shell and shall 

be located or connected to preclude the possibility of the tank contents over-
flowing into the foam lines. 

ix. Fixed foam discharge outlets shall be provided with a seal, frangible under low 

pressure, to prevent entrance of vapors into foam outlets and pipelines. 

x.  Fixed foam discharge outlets shall be provided with inspection means to allow 

maintenance and for inspection and replacement of vapor seals. 

Table 9.11.D.: Foam Handline and Monitor for Fixed Roof Hydrocarbon Tanks 

HAZARD 

REQUIRED DESIGN  
DENSITY          
(MINIMUM             
APPLICATION RATE) 

FOAM      
ADDITION 
FOR         
HYDRAULIC 
IMBALANCE 

DURATION 

1. Class II Hydrocarbons 

2. Class I Hydrocarbons and Hydrocarbons heated 

above their Flash Points 

3. Crude Oil and Liquid with Boil Over Characteristics 

6.5 lpm/m2                      
(1.06 gpm/ ft2) 
6.5 lpm/m2                      
(1.06 gpm/ ft2) 
6.5 lpm/m2                      
(1.06 gpm/ ft2) 

10% 

10% 

10% 

50 Minutes 

65 Minutes 

65 Minutes 

Table 9.11.E.: Required Number of Fixed Foam Discharge Outlets for Fixed Roof Hydrocarbon Tanks 

TANK DIAMETER OR EQUIVALENT AREA 

MINIMUM NUMBER OF FOAM DISCHARGE   
OUTLETS 

1. Up to 24 m 

2. Over 24 m - 36 m 

3. Over 36 m - 42 m 

4. Over 42 m - 48 m 

5. Over 48 m - 54 m 

6. Over 54 m - 60 m 

7. Over 60 m 

 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 
6, Plus 1 outlet for each additional 462 m2 area 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 663 of 1348 

 
 
ITEMS 

Table 9.11: Foam Sprinkler/ Deluge/ Pourer System Requirements 

REQUIREMENTS 

15. DESIGN                     

xi.    Design Criteria of Subsurface application of Foam protection for Fixed-Roof Stor-

CRITERIA 
FOR LOW –
EXPANSION 
FOAM   
SYSTEM 

age tanks containing Hydrocarbons shall comply with Table 9.11.F. 

xii.   Subsurface injection systems shall not be used for protection of Class IA hydrocar-

bon liquids or for the protection of alcohols, esters, ketones, aldehydes, anhy-
drides, or other products requiring the use of alcohol-resistant foams. 

xiii.   Foam concentrates and equipment for subsurface injection shall be listed. 
xiv.   Fluoroprotein foam, AFFF, and FFFP for subsurface injection shall have expansion 

ratios between 2:1 and 4:1. 

xv.    The foam velocity at the point of discharge into the tank contents shall not ex-

ceed 3 m/sec (10 ft./sec) for Class IB liquids or 6 m/sec (20 ft./sec) for other clas-
ses of liquids unless actual tests prove that higher velocities are satisfactory. 

xvi.   Where two or more outlets are required, they shall be located so that the foam 

travel on the surface cannot exceed 30 m (100 ft.). 

xvii. The number of  subsurface foam discharge outlets for fixed-roof storage tanks 

containing Hydrocarbons shall comply with Table 9.11.F. 

xviii.  A highly viscous liquid heated above 93°C lower initial application rated may be 
required to prevent frothover. Good judgment should be used in applying foam 
in tank containing hot oil, burning asphalt or burning liquid heated over 100°C. 

xix.  If due to type and quantity of discharge outlet the discharge rate is highly propor-

tionate, the reduction in the discharge period is permitted but shall be not less 
than 70%. 

xx.   The foam discharge outlet shall be elevated at least 0.3m above the highest wa-

ter level at the bottom. 

xxi.  The size and length of the pipe upstream of the foam maker shall be designed to 

limit the back pressure within the design condition of the equipment.  

Table 9.11.F.: Subsurface Foam Discharge Density, Number of Outlets for                                                             

Fixed Roof Hydrocarbon Tanks 

TANK DIAMTER  
m 

1. Up to 24 m 

2. Over 24 m—36 m 

3. Over 36 m—42 m 

4. Over 42 m—48 m 

4. Over 48 m—54 m 

4. Over 54 m—60 m 

4. Over 60 m 

 

CLASS II LIQUID 

4.1 lpm (0.10 gpm) 
1 Outlet 
30 minutes  

4.1 lpm (0.10 gpm) 
1 Outlet 
30 minutes  

4.1 lpm (0.10 gpm) 
2 Outlet 
30 minutes  

4.1 lpm (0.10 gpm) 
2 Outlet 
30 minutes  

4.1 lpm (0.10 gpm) 
2 Outlet 
30 minutes  

4.1 lpm (0.10 gpm) 
3 Outlet 
30 minutes  

CLASS I AND LIQUID 
HEATED ABOVE THEIR 
FLASH POINTS 

CRUDE OIL AND LIQUID 
WITH BOILOVER 

4.1 lpm (0.10 gpm) 
1 Outlet 
55 minutes  

4.1 lpm (0.10 gpm) 
2 Outlet 
55 minutes  

4.1 lpm (0.10 gpm) 
3 Outlet 
55 minutes  

4.1 lpm (0.10 gpm) 
4 Outlet 
55 minutes  

4.1 lpm (0.10 gpm) 
5 Outlet 
55 minutes  

4.1 lpm (0.10 gpm) 
6 Outlet 
55 minutes  

4.1 lpm (0.10 gpm) 
1 Outlet 
55 minutes  

4.1 lpm (0.10 gpm) 
2 Outlet 
55 minutes  

4.1 lpm (0.10 gpm) 
3 Outlet 
55 minutes  

4.1 lpm (0.10 gpm) 
4 Outlet 
55 minutes  

4.1 lpm (0.10 gpm) 
5 Outlet 
55 minutes  

4.1 lpm (0.10 gpm) 
6 Outlet 
55 minutes  

4.1 lpm (0.10 gpm) 
3 Outlet, and additional 1 
outlet for every 465 m2 
30 minutes  

4.1 lpm (0.10 gpm) 
6 Outlet, and additional 1 
outlet for every 700 m2 
55 minutes  

4.1 lpm (0.10 gpm) 
6 Outlet, and additional 1 
outlet for every 465 m2 
55 minutes  

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 664 of 1348 

Table 9.11: Foam Sprinkler/ Deluge/ Pourer System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

15.  DESIGN                     

xxii.   The design Criteria of Foam Monitor System for Loading Racks (Truck or Rail 

CRITERIA FOR 
LOW –
EXPANSION 
FOAM   SYSTEM 

 

cars at loading and unloading) shall comply with Table 9.11.G. 

xxiii.   The design Criteria of Foam Monitor System for Loading Diked and non-

diked areas shall comply with Table 9.11.H. 

xxiv.   Fixed foam outlets shall not be used to protect horizontal or pressure tanks.  

Table 9.11.G.: Design Criteria for Foam Monitors System for Loading Racks 

HAZARD 

FOAM TYPE 

1. HYDROCARBONS  

2. HYDROCARBONS  

3. FLAMMABLE AND COM-

BUSTIBLE LIQUIDS      
REQUIRING ALCOHOL 
RESISTANT FOAMS 

Protein and    
Flouroprotein 

AFFF, FFFP,  
Alcohol Resistant 
AFFF and FFFP 

Alcohol Resistant 
Foams 

REQUIRED DESIGN  
DENSITY          
(MINIMUM             
APPLICATION RATE) 

FOAM      
ADDITION 
FOR         
HYDRAULIC 
IMBALANCE 

DURATION 

6.5 lpm (0.16 gpm) 

10% 

15 minutes  

4.1 lpm (0.10 gpm) 

10% 

15 minutes  

4.1 lpm (0.10 gpm) 
or Manufacturer’s 
specifications, 
whichever is higher 

10% 

15 minutes  

Table 9.11.H.: Design Criteria for Foam Monitors System for Diked Areas 

HAZARD 

REQUIRED DESIGN  DENSITY          
(MINIMUM  APPLICATION 
RATE) 

DURATION 
CLASS I 
HYDROCARBON 

DURATION 
CLASS II 
HYDROCARBONS 

1. LOW LEVEL FOAM           

DISCHARGE OUTLET 

4.1 lpm (0.10 gpm) 

2. FOAM MONITORS 

6.5 lpm (0.16 gpm) 

10% 

10% 

15 minutes  

15 minutes  

Points to Ponder 

The application of solid foam streams, turbulently into the flammable liquid could 

cause ignition of the ensuing fire, due to the static discharges resulting from 

splashes and turbulence. 

Any application of foam to an unignited flammable liquid should be as gentle as 

possible through an appropriately selected, designed and executed method of 

foam systems. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 665 of 1348 

 

Figure 9.35: Typical Fixed Foam Discharge and Water spray cooling System  outlet System for Hydrocarbon tanks 

Figure 9.36: Typical Fixed Foam Monitor System for Diked Area 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 666 of 1348 

 

Table 9.11: Foam Sprinkler/ Deluge/ Pourer System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

14. MEDIUM 

AND HIGH –
EXPANSION 
FOAM      
SYSTEM 

i.  Medium- and high-expansion foams shall be specifically evaluated to verify the 
applicability of medium- or high-expansion foam as a fire control agent for the 
type of hazard being considered for the application of foam. 

ii.  Medium and high-expansion Foam Systems shall be provided where required by 

other sections of the code to protect hazards such as Ordinary combustibles, 
Flammable Liquids etc. 

iii.  Liquefied Natural Gas (LPG) shall be protected only with High Expansion Foam 

Systems. 

iv.  Medium and high-expansion Foam Systems shall  not be used on fires containing 
Cellulose Nitrate, energized unenclosed electrical equipment and Water reactive 
metals such as Sodium, Potassium, Sodium-Potassium Alloys (NaK), Triethyl-
aluminium, Phosphorus pentoxide, Liquefied Flammable Gas.  

v.  Protection with Foam and Personnel Safety shall be as per material MSDS and 

foam manufacturers specifications. 

vi.  Medium and high-expansion Foam Systems can be used in total flooding systems, 

Local application systems or portable foam generating Systems. 

vii. Medium and high-expansion Foam Systems shall maintain an electrical clearance 

from live insulated electrical equipment as per Table 9.11.I. 

viii. Automatic Detection in accordance with Chapter 8. Fire Detection and Alarm 

Systems shall be used for fixed High expansion Foam Systems. 

ix.  Where hazard evaluation demands, detectors shall be Civil Defence listed and 

approved. The same applies to flame, combustibles, vapor, gas detectors, inter-
faced to control systems as per  Chapter 8. Fire Detection and Alarm Systems. 

x.  The foam-generating apparatus shall be located and arranged so that inspection, 

testing, recharging, and other maintenance operations are facilitated and the 
interruption of protection is held to a minimum. 

xi.  The foam-generating equipment shall be located as close as possible to the haz-
ard(s) it protects, but not where it will be unduly exposed to a fire or explosion. 

xii. The system Design, Application and installation shall be as per manufacturer’s 

specifications. 

Table 9.11.I.: Clearance from High Expansion Foam Equipment to Live Uninsulated Electrical Component 

NOMINAL LINE 
VOLTAGE 
kV 

1. Up to 15 

2. 23  

3. 34.5  

4. 46  

5. 69 

6. 115 

7.138 

8. 161 

9. 196– 230 

10. 287-380 

11. 500 

12. 500-700 

 

NOMINAL VOLTAGE TO 
GROUND 
kV 

DESIGN BASIC IMPULSE 
LEVEL (BIL) 
kV 

MNIMUM CLEARANCE OF 
HIGH EXPANSION  
FOAM EQUIPMENT 

Up to 9 

13 

20 

27 

40 

66 

80 

93 

114-132 

166-220 

290 

290-400 

110 

150 

200 

250 

350 

550 

650 

750 

178 mm 

254 mm 

330 mm 

432 mm 

635 mm 

940 mm 

1118 mm 

1321 mm 

900/ 1050/ 1175/ 1300  1600 mm/ 1930 mm/ 
2210 mm/ 2489 mm 

1425/ 1550 

1675/ 1800/ 1925 

2100/ 2300 

2769 mm/ 3048 mm 

1675 mm/ 3327 mm/ 
3607 mm/ 3886 mm 

4267 mm/ 4674 mm 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 667 of 1348 

Table 9.11: Foam Sprinkler/ Deluge/ Pourer System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

14. MEDIUM AND 

HIGH –
EXPANSION 
FOAM SYSTEM 

xiii. The maximum submergence time for high-expansion Foam Systems meas-

ured from the start of the foam discharge shall not be more than the duration 
mentioned as per Table 9.11.J. 

Table 9.11.J.: Maximum Submergence Time for High Expansion Foam 

LIGHT OR         
UNPROTECTED 
STEEL            
CONSTRUCTION- 
SPRINKLERRED 

LIGHT OR         
UNPROTECTED 
STEEL             
CONSTRUCTION- 
NON-
SPRINKLERRED 

HEAVY OR   
PROTECTED 
FIRE RESISTIVE   
CONSTRUCTION- 
SPRINKLERRED 

HEAVY OR    
PROTECTED 
FIRE RESISTIVE   
CONSTRUCTION- 
NON- 
SPRINKLERRED 

3 minutes  

2 minutes  

5 minutes  

3 minutes  

4 minutes  

3 minutes  

5 minutes  

3 minutes  

4 minutes  

3 minutes  

6 minutes  

4 minutes  

7 minutes  

5 minutes  

8 minutes  

6 minutes  

5 minutes  

4 minutes  

6 minutes  

5 minutes  

7 minutes  

5 minutes  

8 minutes  

6 minutes  

7 minutes  

5 minutes  

8 minutes  

6 minutes  

 

HAZARD 

1. FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS 

*FLASH POINTS BELOW 
38°C (100°F)+ HAVING A 
VAPOR PRESSURE NOT 
EXCEEDING 276 KPA (40 
PSIA) 

2. COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS 
*FLASH POINTS OF 38°C 
(100°F) AND ABOVE+ 

3. LOW-DENSITY           
COMBUSTIBLES (I.E. 
FOAM RUBBER, FOAM 
PLASTICS, ROLLED       
TISSUE, OR CREPE       
PAPER) 

4. HIGH-DENSITY            
COMBUSTIBLES (I.E. 
ROLLED PAPER KRAFT 
OR COATED BANDED) 

5. HIGH-DENSITY COM-

BUSTIBLES (I.E. ROLLED 
PAPER KRAFT OR COAT-
ED UNBANDED) 

6. RUBBER TIRES 

7. COMBUSTIBLES IN      
CARTONS, BAGS, OR 
FIBER DRUMS 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 668 of 1348 

3.10.  Water Mist Systems 

 
3.10.1. 

 The requirements for Water Mist System material, design, installation shall be as 
per Table 9.12., and the Applicable General Requirements of Table 9.3.   

Table 9.12: Water Mist System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. DEFINITION 

2. APPLICATION 

3. COMPONENTS 

4. FIRE PUMPS 

i.  A distribution system connected to a water supply or water and atomizing media 

supplies that is equipped with one or more nozzles capable of delivering water 
mist intended to control, suppress, or extinguish fires  

ii.  Water mist shall be as per the manufacturer's specifications with requirements of 
its listing based on its demonstration to meet the performance requirements for 
specific applications such as Road Tunnels, Service Tunnels, Cable spread areas, 
Machinery rooms, Marine service rooms, Combustion turbines, wet benches and 
such processing equipment, Local application to equipment, Industrial oil cook-
ers, computer room raised floors, Chemical fume hoods and continuous wood 
board presses. 

iii. A Water Mist System without detailed design, equipment selection, installation 
and maintenance manual, listed and recognized by international testing and cer-
tification bodies shall not be acceptable. 

iv. Water mist can be discharged through various arrangement of Systems such as 

Water Mist deluge Systems, Pre-action Systems, Dry Pipe Systems etc. See                 
Section  1.10. for definitions. 

i.  The characteristics of the specific application (compartment variables and hazard 

classification) shall be consistent with the listing of the system. 

ii.  Pre-engineered water mist systems for compartment enclosures shall not be ex-

trapolated beyond the volume, ceiling height, ventilation rate, and number of 
nozzles tested, unless the dimensions of the enclosure are such that additional 
nozzles are required to maintain nozzle spacing. 

iii. The system design and installation manual evaluated by the listing tests shall 

identify the working limits and parameters of the system, the fire hazards, and 
the range of compartment variables for which the listing is applicable. 

iv. The parameters of ventilation, either natural or forced shall be addressed in the 

design and installation manual. 

i.  Fire Pumps, Control System, Additives, Fire Water Tank, Gas and water contain-

ers/cylinders, Pipes, Tubes, Fittings, Spray Nozzles, pressure gauges, Isolation 
valves, Solenoid Valves, Strainers/Filters, Fire Detection and Alarm Systems and 
Signs. 

ii.  All the components of the water mist  systems shall be listed and approved by 

Civil Defence. 

iii. The system components shall be rated for the maximum working pressure to 

which they are exposed, but not less than 12.1 bar (175 psi). 

i.  Fire Pump set shall consist of 1 Electric driven pump, 1 diesel driven pump and 1 

electric Jockey pump, complete with controllers. 

ii.  Electrical or diesel-driven pumps supplying water mist systems shall be of suffi-

cient capacity to exceed both the system flow rate and pressure demands as de-
termined by hydraulic calculations, by a minimum of 10 percent for both flow 
and pressure. 

iii. The discharge piping for water mist pumps and pump assemblies for high pres-

sure or intermediate pressure water mist systems shall be equipped with a 
valved test connection for the purpose of connecting a flow metering device to 
permit accurate measurement of the pump performance during the acceptance 
test and during annual testing. 

5. WET RISERS 
AND HOSE 
SYSTEMS 

 

i.  Where wet risers and hose systems are required by this code, a separate systems 

complete with Pumps, pipes and fittings shall be provided as per other sections 
of this chapter. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 669 of 1348 

 

Table 9.12: Water Mist System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

6. BREECHING 

INLET 

i.  A breeching inlet for Civil Defence shall be provided for all water mist systems 

except where                                                                                                                                                 
a. The water mist is protecting an area less than 200 m2 .                                                      
b. The water mist system pressure exceeds 12 bar and is supplied by storage cylin-
ders.                                                                                                                                                         
c. Water mist systems where the atomizing medium is essential for fire suppres-
sion. 

ii.  For water mist systems with system design pressures less than or equal to 12 bar 
(175 psi), the connection of the fire department connection to the system shall be 
made on the upstream (supply) side of the system strainer or filter. 

iii. For water mist systems with system design pressures in excess of 12 bar (175 psi), 
the connection of the fire department connection to the system shall be made on 
the suction side of the pressure source components. 

i.  All the components in the water mist systems and the additive injection system 

shall be of corrosion resistant material. 

i.  Gas and water containers subject to pressurization shall be made, tested, ap-

proved, equipped and marked in accordance with the current specifications of the 
ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code, Section VIII,  or other approved interna-
tional standards. 

ii.  Each pressurized container shall be provided with a safety device to release ex-

cess pressure. 

iii. Each water and gas container shall have a permanent nameplate or other perma-
nent marking specifying the liquid/gas held in the container (including additives) 
and the nominal water volume and pressurization level (where applicable) of the 
container. 

iv. All containers supplying the same manifold outlet shall be interchangeable and of 

the same size and charge. 

i.  Fire Detection, control system, design and installation shall be as per Chapter 8. 

Fire Detection and Alarm Systems. 

i.  Nozzles shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s listing. 
ii.  The minimum and maximum height and nozzle pressure limitations shall be in 

accordance with the manufacturer’s listing. 

iii. The minimum and maximum distances between nozzles, distance from walls, ob-
structions to nozzles, distance below ceilings etc. shall be in accordance with the 
manufacturer’s listing. 

iv. Temperature rating, Classifications and color coding of thermally activated noz-

zles shall be as per Table 9.12.A. 

Table 9.12.A: Nozzle Operating Temperature and Colour Classification 

TEMPERATURE 
RATING OF    
SPRINKLER HEAD 
57OC—77OC  
79OC—107OC  
121OC—149OC  
163OC—191OC  
204OC—246OC  
260OC—302OC  
343OC  

TEMPERATURE            
CLASSIFICATION 

COLOUR CODE 

GLASS BULB  
COLOURS 

Ordinary 

Uncoloured or Black  Orange or Red 

Intermediate 

White 

Yellow or Green 

High 

Extra High 

Blue 

Red 

Very Extra High 

Green 

Ultra High 

Ultra High 

Orange 

Orange 

Blue 

Purple 

Black 

Black 

Black 

7. ADDITIVES 

8. GAS AND  
WATER   
CONTAINERS  

9.  FIRE           

DETECTION 
AND ALARM 
SYSTEM 

10. NOZZLES 

MAXIMUM  CEILING           
TEMPERATURE 

1. 38OC  
2. 66OC  
3. 107OC  
4. 149OC  
5. 191OC  
6. 246OC  
7. 329OC  
 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 670 of 1348 

 

Table 9.12: Water Mist System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

11. SYSTEM          
PROTECTION 
AREA                
LIMITATIONS 

12. PRESSURE 

GAUGES 

13. STRAINERS AND 

FILTERS 

14. VALVES 

15. PRV’S 

i.  The maximum area on any floor to be protected by water mist supplied by 

any one water mist system riser or a combined system riser shall be 4831 m2 
for Light Hazard and Ordinary Hazard. 

i.  Pressure gauges shall be installed in the following locations.                                              

a. On both sides of a pressure regulating valve                                                                 
b. On the pressurized side of all supply connections                                                        
c. On the pressurized side of all system control valves                                                    
d. On all pressurized storage containers                                                                             
e. On all air supplies for dry pipe and pre-action systems 

i.  All installed water mist systems must have a suitable and approved water bas-

ket inline water filter and a suitably approved Y-strainer to capture any dirt 
from entering the pumps and causing nozzle blockages. 

ii.  Every water mist nozzle shall have a suitable inbuilt stainless steel sieve to 

prevent dirt from entering the nozzle and causing blockages. 

i.  All valves in the system shall be listed and installed as per their listing. 
ii.  Valves on connections to water supplies, sectional control and isolation 

valves, and other valves in supply pipes to nozzles. 

iii. Water mist system Control and activation valves shall operate by an approved 

mechanical, electrical, or pneumatic means. 

i.  Compressed gas pressure reducing valves shall be installed as per their listing, 

where the supply pressure is higher than the system design pressure.  

ii.  Pressure set, point-adjusting mechanisms on the PRVs shall be tamper re-

sistant, and the adjustment shall be indicated by a permanent marking. 

16. DRAIN AND TEST        

i.  Each water mist system shall have a drain on the system side of the control 

CONNECTIONS 

valve. 

ii.  The inspector’s test connections shall contain an orifice equal to or smaller 

than the smallest nozzle installed in the system. 

17. HANGERS AND       

i.  Hangers and supports shall be located in accordance with the requirements 

SUPPORTS 

contained within the system’s design manual. 

ii.  The length of an unsupported arm over to a nozzle shall not exceed 0.6 m (2 

ft.) for steel pipe or 0.3 m (1 ft.) for steel tubing. 

iii. Hangers used on low pressure water mist systems shall be permitted to be 

designed and installed in accordance with Table 9.7.30. 

iv. The tube Hanger Maximum spacing shall be as per Table 9.12.B. 

Table 9.12.B: Water Mist Tube Hanger Spacing 

TUBE O.D (Outer Diameter) 

MAXIMUM SPACING BETWEEN HANGERS 

1. 6– 14 mm 

2. 15– 22 mm 

3. 23-28 mm 

4. 30-38 mm 

5. 40-49 mm 

6. 50– 59 mm 

7. 60– 70 mm 

8. 71-89 mm 

9. 90-108 mm 

 

1.21 m 

1.52 m 

1.82 m 

2.12 m 

2.42 m 

3 m 

3.33 m 

3.64 m 

3.94 m 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 671 of 1348 

 

Figure 9.37.: Typical Water Mist System 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 672 of 1348 

3.11.  Yard Hydrant Systems 

 
3.11.1. 

 

 The requirements for Yard Hydrant System material, design, installation shall be as 
per Table 9.13. and Applicable general requirements of Table 9.3. 

Table 9.13.: Yard Hydrant System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

i.  A fire hydrant system is a water supply with a sufficient pressure and flow de-
livered through pipes around the protected premises, at open yards or along 
the fire access road in public spaces to a strategically located network of hy-
drant valves for fire-fighting purposes or to refill the Civil Defence water tank-
ers. 

ii.  Consideration should be given to establish Public Fire Hydrant System as part 

of UAE infrastructure.  

iii. Private Fire Hydrant Systems are the Hydrant network System provided on pri-

vate property specifically to protect the buildings and structures within that 
particular property.  

i.  Where a private Fire Hydrant network is required by the Civil Defence, the Fire 

Hydrant network system shall be ‘dedicated’. Combined networks with irriga-
tion, processes or domestic use are not allowed. 

ii.  All new developments greater than 20,000 m2 shall be provided with private 

yard hydrant system. 

iii. All storage, warehouse and factories, having a built area and/or storage yard  

exceeding 3600 m2 shall be provided with a private yard hydrant system. 

i.  Fire Pumps, Control System, Fire Water Tank, Pipes, Fittings, Hydrant pillar 

with instantaneous coupling valve outlets, pressure gauges, Isolation valves, 
Hose, Signs. 

ii.  All components of the yard hydrant system shall be listed and approved by Civ-

il Defence. 

iii. System components shall be rated for the maximum working pressure to which 

they are exposed, but not less than 12.1 bar (175 psi). 

i.  Hydrants shall not be less than 6 inch. (152 mm) in diameter. 
ii.  Hydrants shall be of wet type and above ground. 
iii. Hydrant outlet shall be of instantaneous coupling for hose connection. 

i.  The minimum flow rate for each fire hydrant shall be 500 Gallons per Minute 

at 250 gpm per outlet (1900 LPM at 950 LPM/outlet). 

ii.  Two number of fire hydrants shall be considered for hydraulic demand calcula-

tions which is, a total flow requirement of 1000GPM (3800 LPM) per single 
yard hydrant system. 

iii. The minimum Pressure required for the most remote fire hydrant in the sys-

tem loop is 6.9 bars.  

i.  Pipes and Fittings for the fire Hydrant system shall be approved by Civil De-

fence. See Section 9.20. 

ii.  Steel piping shall not be used for general underground service.  
iii. The type and class of pipe for a particular underground installation shall be 
determined through consideration of factors such as Corrosion, working 
pressure and temperature, soil conditions, susceptibility of pipe to ex-
ternal loads of earth and traffic. 

iv. The underground Hydrant piping shall be HDPE (High Density Polyeth-

ylene),   with a minimum of standard dimension ratio (SDR) 9. 

1. DEFINITION 

2. APPLICATION 

3. COMPONENTS 

4. HYDRANTS 

5. FLOW AND  
PRESSURE 

6. PIPING 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 673 of 1348 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

Table 9.13.: Yard Hydrant System Requirements 

7. WATER 

i.  The water for the Hydrant System shall be potable. 
ii.  TSE (Treated Sewage Affluent) water, tested for fire fighting purposes shall be ac-

8. INSTALLA-
TION 

ceptable. 

iii. Lake and Pond (Sweet) water shall be acceptable, provided that an adequate water 

level reserve is ensured at all times. 

i.  Hydrants shall be installed along the fire access road around the premises 

to be protected. 

ii.  The hydrant piping shall be looped without open ends, such that any isola-
tion from one side will not hamper the water supply from the other end to 
any hydrant. 

iii.  The maximum allowed hydrant piping wing without looping is 45 m. 
iv.  The piping shall not be installed beneath buildings. 
v.  A pipe under driveways shall be buried at a minimum depth of 0.9 m. 
vi.  A pipe under railroad tracks shall be buried at a minimum depth of 1.2 m.  
vii.  Hydrants shall be set on flat stones or concrete slabs and shall be provided 

with small stones (or the equivalent) placed around the drain to ensure 
drainage.  

viii.  The center of a hose outlet shall be not less than 457 mm and not more 

than 914mm above final grade.  

ix.  Hydrants shall be protected with barricades if subject to mechanical dam-

age, Vehicular accidents. Such means of hydrant protection shall be ar-
ranged in a manner that does not interfere with the connection to, or op-
eration of, hydrants. 

x.  Check Valves, Detector Check Valves and Backflow Prevention Valves shall 
not be installed in the service stub between the fire hydrant and the water 
supply piping. 

xi.  All hydrants shall be with an isolation valve connection in a valve chamber. 

9. LOCATION 

i.  Fire hydrants shall be located at not less than 2 m and not more than 12 m 

from the building to be protected. 

ii.  The spacing between Hydrants along the fire access road shall be as follows.                                                                                                                                             

a. Occupancies other than storage and industrial shall be 120 m.                    
b. Light and Ordinary hazard Storage/Industrial occupancies shall be 100 m. 
c. High Hazard storage and industrial occupancies shall be 60 m.                     
d. Logistics warehouse and Waste dumping lands shall be 60 m. 

AND               
SPACING 

 

Figure 9.38.: Hydrant Isolation Valve Chamber and Typical Hydrant Installation 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 674 of 1348 

3.12.  Wet Chemical Systems 

 
3.12.1. 

 The requirements for Wet Chemical System material, design, installation shall be 
as per Table 9.14. 

Table 9.14: Wet Chemical System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. DEFINITION 

2. APPLICATION 

3. COMPO-
NENTS 

4. NOZZLE  

i.  Generally a wet chemical solution is, including but not limited to, potassium car-

bonate–based, potassium acetate–based, potassium citrate–based, or a combina-
tion thereof, and is mixed with water to form an alkaline solution capable of being 
discharged through piping or tubing when under expellant gas pressure. 

ii.  The wet Chemical System in this code refers to pre-engineered systems, that dis-
charge wet chemical from fixed nozzles and piping by means of an expellant gas. 
iii. Wet chemical extinguishing agents shall not be acceptable for use in areas where 

fires involve an energized electrical equipment. 

iv.  The building owner(s) shall be responsible for the protection of a common ex-

haust duct(s) used by more than one tenant and the tenant shall be responsible 
for the protection of common exhaust duct(s) serving hoods located within the 
tenant’s space and up to the point of connection to the building owner’s common 
exhaust duct. 

i.  The pre-engineered Wet Chemical System can be used to protect hazards such as 

Commercial Kitchen Hoods, Plenums, Ducts and associated cooking appliances, 
Grease removal devices and emergency recovery devices installed in exhaust sys-
tem. 

ii.  Each protected cooking appliance, individual hood, and branch exhaust duct di-

rectly connected to the hood shall be protected by a system or systems designed 
for simultaneous operation. 

i.  Wet Chemical container, Detectors, Control System, Expellant Gas cartridge, 

Pipes, Tubes, Fittings, Hose, Discharge Nozzles, pressure gauges, Manual actua-
tors, Isolation valves, and Solenoid Valves.  

ii.  The wet Chemical system as an entire system with its design, installation and 

maintenance manual from the manufacturer shall be listed and approved by Civil 
Defence. 

i.  Nozzle shall be listed and shall be provided with an internal strainer or a separate 

listed strainer located immediately upstream. 

ii.  Discharge nozzles shall be of brass, stainless steel, or other corrosion-resistant 

materials, or be protected inside and out against corrosion. 

iii. All discharge nozzles shall be provided with caps or other suitable devices to pre-
vent the entrance of grease vapors, moisture, or other foreign materials into the 
piping and shall blow off or open during discharge. 

5. DETECTORS /
OPERATING 
DEVICES 

i.  Operating devices shall be designed to function properly through a minimum tem-

perature range from 0°C to 49°C or marked to indicate their temperature limita-
tions. 

ii.  Detectors or Operating devices and control system shall be part of the listed sys-

tem as assembly. 

iii. The detection of Wet Chemical System shall be interfaced with the main fire de-

tection and alarm system. 

iv.  At least one fusible link or heat detector shall be installed within each exhaust 

duct opening and cooking appliance in accordance with the manufacturer’s listing. 

6. FUEL/POWER    

SHUT-OFF 

i.  On activation of any cooking equipment of the fire-extinguishing system, all 

sources of fuel and electric power that produce heat to all equipment protected 
by the system shall be shut down. 

ii.  Gas appliances not requiring protection but located under the same ventilation 

equipment shall also be shut off. 

iii. Shutoff devices shall require manual resetting prior to fuel or power being re-

 

stored. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 675 of 1348 

Table 9.14: Wet Chemical System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

7. SYSTEM   

ACTUATION 

i.  Wet Chemical Systems shall have both automatic and manual methods of actua-

tion. 

ii.  A readily accessible means for the manual activation shall be located in a path of 

egress. When manual activation is used for cooking related protection, the manual 
activation device shall be installed no more than 1200 mm, nor less than 1067 mm 
above the floor and shall clearly identify the hazard protected. 

8. EXPELLANT 

GAS 

i.  A method and instructions shall be provided for checking the amount or the pres-
sure of expellant gas to ensure that it is sufficient for the proper operation of the 
system. 

9. LOCATION 

i.  Dry chemical containers and expellant gas assemblies shall be located within the 
temperature range specified in the manufacturer’s listed installation and mainte-
nance manual. 

10. DESIGN 

i.  Wet Chemical Systems can be Total flooding, Local application type, Hand hose type 
or combinations. Any Wet Chemical System shall be Engineered or Pre-engineered.  

ii.  All the system, cylinders, containers, Wet Chemical, expellant gas, piping, valves 

and nozzles shall be as per Manufacturer’s instructions with approval and listing for 
particular applications and same shall be listed with Civil Defence. 

iii. To expel the agent, most systems use pressurized cartridges of nitrogen or carbon 

dioxide.  

iv. In kitchen hood and common exhaust duct protection, each protected cooking ap-
pliance(s), individual hood(s), and branch exhaust duct(s) directly connected to the 
hood or common exhaust duct shall be protected by a single system or by systems 
designed for simultaneous operation.  

v.  Maximum Discharge time shall not exceed 30 seconds. 

 

Figure 9.39: Typical Wet Chemical System protection for Kitchen Hood 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 676 of 1348 

3.13.  Dry Chemical Systems 

 
3.13.1. 

 

 

 The requirements for Dry Chemical System material, design, installation shall be as 
per Table 9.15. 

Table 9.15: Dry Chemical System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. DEFINITION 

2. APPLICATION 

3. COMPONENTS 

4. ELECTRICAL 
CLEARANCE 

5. NOZZLE  

 

i.  A Dry Chemical extinguishing agent is a finely divided powdered material that 
has been specially treated to be water repellent and capable of being fluidized 
and free-flowing so that it can be discharged through hose lines and piping when 
under expellant gas pressure. 

ii.  The dry Chemical System in this code refers to pre-engineered systems, that dis-

charge the dry chemical from either hand hose line or fixed nozzles and piping 
by means of an expellant gas. 

iii. The sodium bicarbonate-based dry chemical agent consists primarily of sodium 

bicarbonate (NaHCO3) and is suitable for use on all types of flammable liquid 
and gas fires (Class B) and for fires involving energized electrical equipment 
(Class C), Cooking oils and Fats. 

iv. Commercially available agents are essentially potassium bicarbonate (KHCO3), 
potassium chloride (KCl), and urea-based potassium bicarbonate (KC2N2H3O3). 

v.  The multipurpose Dry Chemical agent has as its base monoammonium phos-

phate (NH4H2PO4) and is similar in its effect on Class B and Class C fires to the 
other dry chemicals. The multipurpose Dry Chemical shall not be used on deep-
fat fryers and delicate electrical equipment. 

vi. Different types of Dry Chemicals from different manufacturer’s shall not be 

mixed for protection purpose. 

i.  A pre-engineered Dry Chemical System can be used to protect hazards such as 

Flammable and Combustible Liquids/ Gases/ Solids/ Plastics, Oil filled transform-
ers, circuit breakers, commercial kitchen hoods.  

ii.  Dry Chemical extinguishing systems shall not be used for protection of Cellulose 
Nitrate and Combustible metals, such as sodium, potassium, magnesium, titani-
um and zirconium. 

iii. Multiple systems protecting common hazards shall be designed for a simultane-

ous operation. 

i.  Dry Chemical container, Detectors, Control System, Expellant Gas cartridge, 

Pipes, Tubes, Fittings, Hand Hose, Discharge Nozzles, pressure gauges, Manual 
actuators, Isolation valves, and Solenoid Valves.  

ii.  The dry chemical system as an entire system with its design, installation and 
maintenance manual from manufacturer shall be listed and approved by Civil 
Defence. 

i.  All the dry chemical System equipment and component shall be located to main-

tain the required electrical clearance as per the manufacturer’s specifications. 

ii.  Where the design basic insulation level (BIL) is not available and where nominal 
voltage is used for the design criteria, the highest minimum clearance specified 
for this group shall be used. 

i.  The nozzle shall be listed and shall be provided with an internal strainer or a sep-

arate listed strainer located immediately upstream of the nozzle. 

ii.  Discharge nozzles shall be of brass, stainless steel or other corrosion-resistant 

materials, or be protected inside and out against corrosion. 

iii. All discharge nozzles shall be provided with caps or other suitable devices to 

prevent the entrance of grease vapors, moisture or other foreign materials into 
the piping and shall blow off or open during discharge. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 677 of 1348 

 

Table 9.15: Dry Chemical System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

6.  DETECTORS /

OPERATING     
DEVICES 

i.  The operating devices shall be designed to function properly through a mini-

mum temperature range from 0°C to 49°C or marked to indicate their temper-
ature limitations. 

ii.  The detectors or Operating devices and control system shall be part of the 

listed system as assembly. 

iii.  The detection of Dry Chemical System shall be interfaced with The main fire 

detection and alarm system. 

7.  FUEL/POWER    

SHUT-OFF 

i.  Shutdown of Ventilation, fans, openings, doors and windows, shutdown of 

fuel, gas, electrical power to the protected equipment etc. shall be achieved at 
the time of system discharge for the successful extinguishing of fire. 

ii.  Shutoff devices shall require manual resetting prior to fuel or power being re-

stored. 

8.  SYSTEM          
ACTUATION 

i.  Dry Chemical Systems shall have both automatic and manual methods of actu-

ation except for hand hose line systems. 

ii.  At least one manual actuator shall be provided for each system. 
iii. A readily accessible means for manual activation shall be located in a path of 

egress. The manual activation device shall be installed no more than 1200 mm, 
nor less than 1067 mm, above the floor and shall clearly identify the hazard 
protected. 

9.  TOTAL         

FLOODING       
SYSTEMS 

i.  A total flooding type of system shall be used only where there is a permanent 

enclosure surrounding the hazard that adequately enables the required con-
centration to be built up.  

ii.  The total area of unclosable openings shall not exceed 15 percent of the total 

area of the sides, top and bottom of the enclosure. 

iii.  Where unclosable openings exceed 15 percent of the total enclosure surface 

area, a local application system shall be used to protect the entire hazard. 

iv.  Where possible, openings such as doorways, windows, and so on, shall be ar-
ranged to close before, or simultaneously with, the start of the dry chemical 
discharge. 

v.  In engineered systems, the minimum design rate of application shall be based 

on the quantity of dry chemical and the maximum time to obtain the design 
concentration, as described in the manufacturer’s listed design and installa-
tion manual. 

vi.  In engineered systems, the rate of application shall be such that the design 

concentration in all parts of the enclosure shall be obtained within 30 seconds.        

i.  Local application systems shall be used for the extinguishment of fires in flam-

mable or combustible liquids, gases, and shallow solids (e.g., paint deposits) 
where the hazard is not enclosed or where the enclosure does not conform to 
the requirements for total flooding. 

ii.  For flammable liquid fires, the nozzles shall be placed tankside or overhead, or 

a combination of tankside and overhead within the limits of the listing, and 
located to prevent splashing during discharge. 

iii.  The minimum effective discharge time and required minimum quantity of dry 
chemical and the minimum application rate shall be as per the manufacturer’s 
specifications. 

10.  LOCAL             

APPLICATION 
SYSTEMS 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 678 of 1348 

 

Table 9.15: Dry Chemical System Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

11.  HAND HOSE 

LINE         
SYSTEMS 

i.  Hand hose systems shall not be used as a substitute for dry chemical extinguishing 

systems equipped with fixed nozzles except where the hazard cannot be ade-
quately or economically provided with a fixed nozzle protection. 

ii.  If a single dry chemical supply is used for both a hand hose line system and a fixed 

nozzle system, the hazards protected by the two systems shall be separated so 
that the hand hose lines cannot be simultaneously used on the hazard protected 
by the fixed nozzle system. 

iii.  Hand hose line stations shall be placed so that they are easily accessible and shall 

have hose lines long enough to reach the most distant hazard that they are ex-
pected to protect. 

iv.  Manual actuation of the dry chemical system shall be possible at each hose line 

station. 

v.  A hand hose line shall have a sufficient quantity of dry chemical to permit its effec-

tive use for a minimum of 30 seconds.  

vi.  Where simultaneous use of two or more hose lines is possible, a sufficient quantity 

of dry chemical shall be available to supply the maximum number of nozzles that 
are likely to be used at any time for at least 30 seconds and at the appropriate 
flow rates. 

 

Figure 9.40. Typical Dry Chemical System protection  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 679 of 1348 

3.14.  Clean Agent Systems 

 
3.14.1. 

 The requirements for Clean Agent System material, design, installation shall be as 
per Table 9.16. 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

Table 9.16.: Clean Agent Systems Requirements 

1. DEFINITION 

i.  The Clean agents allowed in this code shall be electrically non-conducting and leave 

no residue upon evaporation. 

ii.  Any agent mentioned in this section is subject to the periodic evaluation by Civil 

Defence and United States Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) SNAP 
(Significant New Alternatives Policy). Such evaluations shall be based on the clean 
agents’ adverse effects on Human, Marine, Animal health and environmental ad-
verse effects. 

iii. Halocarbon Agents are                                                                                                           

a. Hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs)                                                                                                   
b. Hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs)                                                                                     
c. Perfluorocarbons (PFCs or FCs)                                                                                             
d. Fluoroiodocarbons (FICs)                                                                                                      
e. Fluoroketones (FKs). 

iv. Inert Gas Agents are                                                                                                                    

a. IG-01                                                                                                                                               
b. IG-100                                                                                                                                         
c. IG-55                                                                                                                                              
d. IG-541  

v.  Unnecessary exposure to Halocarbon clean agents OR Inert gas agents including at 

and below the NOAEL and halocarbon decomposition products shall be avoided. 

2. SAFETY 

i. 

In not normally occupied areas, where egress takes longer than 30 seconds but less 
than 1 minute, the halocarbon agent shall not be used in a concentration exceeding 
its LOAEL. See Table 9.16.A. for Halocarbon NOAEL and LOAEL. 

ii.  Unnecessary exposure to inert gas agent systems resulting in low oxygen atmos-

pheres shall be avoided. The maximum exposure time in any case shall not exceed 5 
minutes. See Table 9.16.B. for Inert Gas NOAEL and LOAEL. 

AGENT 

1. FC-3-1-10 
2. FK-5-1-12 
3. HCFC Blend A 
4. HCFC-124 
5. HFC-125 
6. HFC-227ea 
7. HFC-23 
8. HFC-236fa 

Table 9.16.A: Halocarbon Agent NOAEL and LOAEL 

NOAEL (No Observed 
Adverse Effect Level) 

LOAEL (Low Observed 
Adverse Effect Level) 

EXTINGUISHING   
CONCENTRATIONS 

40 % 
10 % 
10 % 
1 % 
7.5 % 
9 % 
30 % 
10 % 

> 40 % 
> 10 % 
> 10 % 
2.5 % 
10 % 
> 10.5 % 
> 50 % 
15 % 

5.5 % 
4.5 % 
9.9 % 
6.6 % 
8.7 % 
6.6 % 
12.9 % 
6.3 % 

INERT GAS CONCENTRATION LEVELS  EXPOSURE LIMIT 

Table 9.16.B: Inert Gas Safety Levels 

EXTINGUISHING    
CONCENTRATIONS 

1. < 43 % (12% Oxygen) 
2. 43 % -52 % (12 % -10 % Oxygen) 
3. 52 % -62 % (10 % -8 % Oxygen) 
4. > 62 % (Below 8% Oxygen) 

5 minutes  
3 minutes  
Only used in normally unoccupied spaces 
Only used in normally unoccupied spaces 

IG– 01 (42%) 
IG-100 (31%) 
IG 541 (31%) 
IG-55 (35%) 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 680 of 1348 

 

Table 9.16.: Clean Agent Systems Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

3.  ELECTRICAL 
CLEARANCE 

i.  All Clean Agent System equipment and component shall be located to maintain 

the required electrical clearance as per the manufacturer’s specifications. 

ii.  Where the design basic insulation level (BIL) is not available and where nominal 
voltage is used for the design criteria, the highest minimum clearance specified 
for this group shall be used. 

4. LISTING 

i.  All Clean Agent systems, Clean Agent, Equipment, Design, Calculations, Installa-

tion and Maintenance manual shall be listed by Civil Defence. 

5. COMPONENTS 

i.  Clean Agent container, Detectors, Control System, Pipes, Tubes, Fittings, Valves, 
Discharge Nozzles, pressure gauges, Manual actuators, Time Delays and Signage. 

6. SYSTEM FLOW 
CALCULATIONS 

i.  System flow calculations shall be performed using a calculation method listed or 
approved by Civil Defence. The system design shall be within the manufacturer’s 
listed limitations. 

7.  ROOM         
INTEGRITY 
AND AIR 
TIGHTNESS 

ROOM VOLUME 
1. 1 m3 
2. 100 m3 
3. 1000 m3 
4. 10.000 m3 
5. 50,000 m3 
6. 500,000 m3 

 

i.  The room Integrity with airtight rooms shall be ensured for effective protection 

using clean agent systems. 

ii.  Room tightness, measured in n50 value, shall be carried out using a blower door 

measurement method. (The Blower door measurement is a scientific approach to 
identify and control air filtration.  It is primarily used to check for any possible 
leakages in a given area by applying two types of pressure: over pressure and 
under pressure. Calculation is based on the Air Change per Hour (ACH), meaning 
the number of time each hour, an amount of air equal to the volume of the area 
to be protected, leaks out at a pressure of 50Pa. The ventilator of the blower 
door measuring device creates a standard over/under pressure of 10 – 60 pa in 
the protected area.  The air escapes over the leakage surfaces of the walls, doors 
and windows to the outside during overpressure measurement or enters from 
there during under pressure measurement. The device measures the required 
flow volume so that the pressure difference of 50 Pa (as an example) needed for 
measuring can be maintained in the area.  After input of all the relevant values 
the program calculates the n50 value, which regulates itself and relates to the 
created pressure value of 50Pa). 

iii. The protected enclosure shall have the structural strength and integrity neces-

sary to contain the agent discharge. If the developed pressures present a threat 
to the structural strength of the enclosure, venting shall be provided to prevent 
excessive pressures. 

iv. The doors and windows used for the protected areas shall comply with fire regu-
lation and shall also be air tight to prevent leakage. The doors and windows shall 
have a mechanism for closing automatically in case of an emergency situation. 
For fire prevention systems the doors and windows shall be kept closed at all 
times except for access. 

v.  All penetrations in the enclosure shall be sealed to ensure airtightness. 
vi. The air tightness in terms of n50 values of the protected enclosure shall be as per 

Table 9.16.C. 

Table 9.16.C.: n50 values for Room Tightness 

n50 VALUE  

5.0 /hour 

1.5 /hour 

1.0 /hour 

0.1 /hour 

0.05 /hour 

0.01 /hour 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 681 of 1348 

 

Table 9.16.: Clean Agent Systems Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

i.  The flame extinguishing or inerting concentrations shall be used in deter-

mining the agent design concentration for a particular fuel.  

ii.  For combinations of fuels, the flame extinguishment or inerting value for the 
fuel requiring the greatest concentration shall be used unless tests are made 
on the actual mixture. 

iii.  Design concentrations shall comply with NFPA 2001 and manufacturer’s 

specifications. 

i.  The amount of halocarbon agent required to achieve the design concentra-

tion shall be calculated from the following formula. 

 
 
 
 
Where,  
 
W—Weight of Clean Agent, Kg 
V—Net Volume of the Hazard, m3 
S– Specific volume of superheated agent vapor, t(m3/Kg) 
C– Agent design concentration (Volume%) 
t– Minimum anticipated Temperature of protected volume, 0C 
 
ii.  The amount of halocarbon agent required to achieve the design concentra-

tion shall be calculated from the following formula. 

 
 
 
 
Where,  
 
X—Volume of Inert gas added per volume of protected space, Kg 
Vs—Specific Volume of Inert Gas agent at 210C and 1.013 bar  
S– Specific volume of Inert gas, t(m3/Kg) 
C– Inert Gas design concentration (Volume%) 
t– Minimum anticipated Temperature of protected volume, 0C 

i.  The minimum design rate of application shall be based on the quantity of 

agent required for the desired concentration and the time allotted to 
achieve the desired concentration. 

ii.  The discharge time period is defined as the time required to discharge from 

the nozzles 95 percent of the agent mass, at 70°F (21°C), necessary to 
achieve the minimum design concentration based on 20 percent safety fac-
tor for flame extinguishment. 

iii.  For Halocarbon agents, the discharge time required to achieve 95 percent of 
the minimum design concentration for flame extinguishment based on a 20 
percent safety factor shall not exceed 10 seconds. 

iv.  For Inert gas agents, the discharge time required to achieve 95 percent of 

the minimum design concentration for flame extinguishment based on a 20 
percent safety factor shall not exceed 60 seconds. 

8.  DESIGN              

CONCENTRATION 

9.  TOTAL             
FLOODING       
QUANTITY 

10. DISCHARGE TIME 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 682 of 1348 

 

Table 9.16.: Clean Agent Systems Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

11.  STORAGE 

CONTAINERS 

i.  The agent shall be stored in containers designed to hold that specific agent at 

ambient temperatures. Containers shall be charged to a fill density or super 
pressurization level within the range specified in the manufacturer’s listed man-
ual. 

ii.  Each agent container shall have a permanent nameplate or other permanent 

marking that indicates                                                                                                                     
a. For Halocarbon agent containers, the agent, tare and gross weights, and su-
perpressurization level (where applicable) of the container.                                                      
b. For Inert gas agent containers, the agent and the pressurization level of the 
container and nominal agent volume. 

iii. Containers connected in manifold, for Halocarbon clean agents in a multiple con-

tainer system, and supplying the same manifold outlet for distribution of the 
same agent shall be interchangeable and of one selected size and charge. 

iv. Containers connected in manifold, for Inert gas agents shall be permitted to uti-

lize multiple storage container sizes connected to a common manifold. 

v.  Storage temperatures shall not exceed or be less than the manufacturer’s listed 

limits. 

vi.  Clean agent containers shall be located as close to hazard as possible or in the 

protected room next to the exit. 

i.  Pipes and pipe connections shall be made of metal (seamless welding) and be 

able to withstand the pressures as specified and calculated and any low temper-
ature encountered. 

ii.  The test pressure for the Inert Gas Systems’ pipe between the cylinders and the 
area valve should have 1.5 times of the service pressure. (i.e. if 200-300 bar cyl-
inder – test pressure, then pipe pressure resistance should be 300-450 bar). The 
test pressure for the pipe between the area valve and the protected area should 
have 1.5 times of the service pressure (i.e. if 60 bar is test pressure – 90 bar 
should be pipe pressure resistance).  

iii. Fittings shall be calculated for the occurring service pressure. Fittings shall be 
suitable for deeper temperatures (approx. –50°C). In sections of the pipe that 
are subjected to static head pressure (closed pipe work) the service pressure 
must not be exceeded and if needed a safety valve shall be fitted.  

iv. The pipe work between the cylinder and area valve shall be marked by the man-
ufacturer, so that the identification according to the test certificates is possible 
after installation. Manifolds and distribution pipes may be marked as a kit by an 
authorized person. An unambiguous assignment to the test certificate shall be 
possible. Flexible pipes and hoses etc. shall only be used where fixed pipes are 
unsuitable. Flexible pipes and hoses shall be as short as possible and approved. 
v.  The inside and outside of pipes shall be effectively protected against corrosion if 
this is necessitated by environmental conditions. To protect sensitive machinery, 
e.g. computers, from corrosive particles in the pipe work, galvanized steel should 
be used as a minimum. 

vi. Special-alloy steels and/or suitable surface protection coatings shall be used if 

the use of pipes and connections made of steel does not provide sufficient corro-
sion protection. 

vii. The pipe work shall be arranged so that it cannot be damaged by its own weight, 
temperature fluctuations, vibration, release of gas or other installation inherent 
influences. 

viii.All pipe work shall be accessible. The gas installation pipe work shall be earthed. 

If necessary, potential equalization conductors (i.e. regarding non-conductive 
pipe joints) between all pipes shall be provided or the installation shall be 
earthed at different points (auxiliary equipotent bonding). 

ix. Pipes shall be secured especially near nozzles to prevent pipe movement due to 

the high pressure during discharge. 

12. PIPES AND 

FITTINGS 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 683 of 1348 

Table 9.16.: Clean Agent Systems Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

13.  NOZZLES 

i.  The selection of the type of nozzles, numbers, spacing etc., shall be as per the man-

ufacturer’s design specifications. 

ii.  Discharge nozzles shall be listed for their intended use. Listing criteria shall include 

flow characteristics, area coverage, height limits, and minimum pressures. Dis-
charge orifices and discharge orifice plates and inserts shall be of a material that is 
corrosion resistant to the agent used and the atmosphere in the intended applica-
tion. 

iii. Special corrosion-resistant materials or coatings shall be required in severely corro-

sive atmospheres. 

iv.  Discharge nozzles shall be permanently marked to identify the manufacturer as 

well as the type and size of the orifice. 

v.  Where clogging by external foreign materials is likely, discharge nozzles shall be 

provided with frangible discs, blowoff caps, or other suitable devices. These devic-
es shall provide an unobstructed opening upon system operation and shall be lo-
cated such that they will not injure personnel. 

14. FIRE        

DETECTION 
AND 
ALARM 

i.  Automatic detection shall be by any listed method or device capable of detecting 
and indicating heat, flame, smoke, combustible vapors, or an abnormal condition 
in the hazard, such as a process trouble, that is likely to produce fire. 

ii.  The fire detection, actuation and alarm system shall comply with Chapter 8. Fire 

Detection and Alarm Systems. 

iii.  Clean agent discharge shall be automatic. However, additional manual release sta-

tions shall be provided. 

iv.  All devices shall be located, installed, or suitably protected so that they are not 

subject to mechanical, chemical, or other damage that would render them inoper-
ative. 

v.  Audible and visual pre-discharge alarms shall be provided within the protected ar-
ea to give positive warning of impending discharge. The operation of the warning 
devices shall be continued after agent discharge until positive action has been tak-
en to acknowledge the alarm and proceed with appropriate action. 

vi.   Abort switches, where provided, shall be located within the protected area an 

near the means of egress for the area. The abort switch shall be of a type that re-
quires a constant manual pressure to cause abort. In all cases the normal and man-
ual emergency control shall override the abort function. Operation of the abort 
function shall result in both audible and distinct visual indications of system impair-
ment. The abort switch shall be clearly recognizable for the purpose intended. 

15. TIME       
DELAYS 

i.  For clean agent extinguishing systems, a pre-discharge alarm and time delay, suffi-

cient to allow the personnel evacuation prior to discharge, shall be provided. 

ii.  Time delays shall be used only for the evacuation of personnel or to prepare the 

hazard area for discharge. 

iii.  Warning and instruction signs at entrances to and inside protected areas shall be 

provided.  

 

Figure 9.41.: Warning Signs Outside Clean Agent protected Area 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 684 of 1348 

 

Figure 9.42: Typical Chemical (Halocarbon) Gas System  

Figure 9.43.: Typical Inert Gas System  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 685 of 1348 

 

Table 9.16.: Clean Agent Systems Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

16. GENERAL EPA 

i.  Must conform with OSHA 29 CFR 1910 Subpart L Sections 1910.160 and 

SAFETY       
RECOMMEN-
DATIONS FOR 
ALL CLEAN 
AGENTS AND 
FIRE             
SUPPRESSION 
AGENTS 

17.  APPLICATION 
OF CHEMICAL 
GASES 

 

1910.162. 

ii.  Per OSHA requirements, protective gear (SCBA) must be available in the event 

personnel must reenter the area. 

iii. Discharge testing should be strictly limited only to that which is essential to 

meet safety or performance requirements. 

iv. The agent should be recovered from the fire protection system in conjunction 

with testing or servicing, and recycled for later use or destroyed. 

v.  EPA (Environmental Protection Agency, USA) recommends that users consult 
Section VIII of the OSHA Technical Manual for information on selecting the ap-
propriate types of personal protective equipment for all listed fire suppression 
agents. EPA has no intention of duplicating or displacing OSHA coverage related 
to the use of personal protective equipment (e.g., respiratory protection), fire 
protection, hazard communication, worker training or any other occupational 
safety and health standard with respect to EPAs regulation of halon substitutes 
(Fire suppression agents). 

vi. The NFPA 2001 Standard for Clean Agent Fire Extinguishing Systems gives 

guidelines for blends that contain HFC-134a or HCFC-22 and other acceptable 
total flooding agents, rather than referring to HFC-134a or HCFC-22 alone. 

i.  The application of Halocarbon Agents shall comply with Table 9.16.D. 
ii.  The Halocarbon (Chemical) Agents and their application acceptable to Civil De-
fence are based on EPA’s SNAP (Significant New Alternatives Policy) program, 
as of October 2016.  

iii. The EPA continuously reviews and updates their policy of these alternate sub-

stitutes and same shall be adopted by Civil Defence based on their periodic 
evaluation of environmental and health risks, including factors such as ozone 
depletion potential, global warming potential, toxicity, flammability, exposure 
potential and acceptance in occupied spaces etc., of all the fire suppression 
agents. 

iv. Where EPA’s SNAP or manufacturers comment or recommend any of the pre-

Install ventilation 
Immediate spillage cleaning in accordance with good hygiene practices 

cautionary and safety measures such as 
a.  Avoid unnecessary exposure 
b.  Container labels of potential hazard and handling procedures to reduce risk 
c.  Only manual activation in occupied areas 
d. 
e. 
f.  Training of the personnel involved 
 
for any clean agent, such installations shall not be acceptable in occupied spac-
es unless all of the additional justifications mentioned below are furnished to 
Civil Defence acceptance and approval. 
 
a.  NOC from concerned authority such as Municipality environment control 

department’s disposal of hazardous wastes. 

b.  NOC from concerned authority  such as Health Authority  which ensures 
that the clean agent is not toxic to humans and animals before and after 
release. 

c.  Manufacturer's training certificate for the engineers and technicians who 

are involved in handling, installing, maintaining and servicing such clean 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 686 of 1348 

 

Table 9.16.D.: Application of Chemical (Halocarbon) Agents 

HALOCARBON 
AGENT 

COMMERCIAL 
NAME 

TECHNICAL INFORMATION  EPA COMMENTS 

1. HFC 227ea 

FM-200,            
FE-227,                   
MH 227,        
Solkaflam 227 

i.  Consists of Carbon, Flu-

vi.  Use of this agent should be in ac-

orine and Hydrogen 

ii.  Super-pressurized with 

Nitrogen to 2482 Kpa 

iii. Colorless, Odorless and 

cordance with the safety guide-
lines in the latest edition of the 
NFPA 2001 Standard for Clean 
Agent. Fire Extinguishing Systems.  

Electrically Non-
conductive 

vii.  See additional comments i, ii, iii, 

iv, v. in Table 9.16.16. 

iv. Operating temperature 

is -12.2 0C  to 65.6 0C 

v.  Stored in liquid form at 

24-42 bar  

i.  Boiling point of 49 oC 
ii.  Stored in liquid form, 

Super-pressurized with 
Nitrogen to 25 bar  

Novec 1230 

2. C6-
PERFLUORO-
KETONE 
*1,1,1,2,2,4,5,5,5-
nonafluoro-4-
(trifluoromethyl)-
3-pentanone+ 

3. HFC 125,  
HFC-227ea with 
0.1% d-limonene 

NAF S 125,  
NAF S 227 
ECARO-25,  
 

i.  Super-pressurized with 

Nitrogen to 2482 Kpa 

ii.  Colorless, Odorless and 

Electrically Non-
conductive 

iii. Operating temperature 

is -12.2 oC  to 65.6 oC 

iv.  Stored in liquid form at 

24 bar  

iii. Use of the agent should be in ac-
cordance with the safety guide-
lines in the latest edition of the 
NFPA 2001 Standard for Clean 
Agent Fire Extinguishing Systems.  

iv. For operations that install and 

maintain total flooding systems 
using this agent, EPA recommends 
the following: - install and use ade-
quate ventilation; clean up all spills 
immediately in accordance with 
good industrial hygiene practices; 
and provide training for safe han-
dling procedures to all employees 
that would be likely to handle con-
tainers of the agent or extinguish-
ing units filled with the agent. 

v.  See additional comments i, ii, iii, iv, 

v. in Table 9.16.16. 

v.  Use of the agent should be in ac-
cordance with the safety guide-
lines in the latest edition of the 
NFPA 2001 Standard for Clean 
Agent Fire Extinguishing Systems.  

vi.  Extinguisher bottles should be 

clearly labeled with the potential 
hazards associated with the use of 
HFC-125 and d-limonene, as well 
as handling procedures to reduce 
risk resulting from these hazards. 
vii.  See additional comments i, ii, iii, 

iv, v. in Table 9.16.16. 

4. HFC 125 

FE-25 

i.  Super-pressurized with 

v.  Use of this agent should be in ac-

Nitrogen to 2482 Kpa 

ii.  Colorless, Odorless and 

Electrically Non-
conductive 

iii. Operating temperature 

is -12.2 oC  to 65.6 oC 

iv.  Stored in liquid form at 

24 bar  

cordance with the safety guide-
lines in the latest edition of the 
NFPA 2001 Standard for Clean 
Agent. Fire Extinguishing Systems.  
vi. See additional comments i, ii, iii, iv, 

v. in Table 9.16.16. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 687 of 1348 

Table 9.16.D.: Application of Chemical (Halocarbon) Agents 

HALOCARBON 
AGENT 

COMMERCIAL 
NAME 

TECHNICAL INFORMATION  EPA COMMENTS 

5. HCFC Blend A 

NAF-S-III 

i.  Super-pressurized with 

v.  Use of this agent should be in ac-

Nitrogen to 2482 Kpa 

ii.  Colorless, Odorless and 

Electrically Non-
conductive 

iii. Operating temperature 

is -12.2 oC  to 65.6 oC 

iv. Stored in liquid form at 

24 bar  

cordance with the safety guide-
lines in the latest edition of the 
NFPA 2001 Standard for Clean 
Agent. Fire Extinguishing Systems.  

vi.  See additional comments i, ii, iii, 

iv, v. in Table 9.16.16. 

NOT ACCEPTABLE BY CIVIL 
DEFENCE 

NA 

NOT ACCEPTABLE 
AGENTS 

HFC 32,  
HCFC 22 
FM-100,  
HFC 227 BC, 
Gelled HFC, 
Halotron II, 
FE-36,  
C3F8, 
C4F10,  
CF31 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 688 of 1348 

Table 9.16: Clean Agent Systems Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

18. APPLICATION 

OF INERT  
GASES 

i.  Application of Inert Gas Agents shall comply with Table 9.16.E. 
ii.  Inert gas agents are compressed and stored in very high pressurized containers. 
All containers shall be listed for such high pressures, allowable filling density and 
operating temperatures. 

iii. Inert gas containers shall not be located in the hazard they protect. The expo-
sure to high temperatures of fires cause rupture and explosions of containers. 

iv. The rooms where inert gas containers are stored, shall be temperature con-

trolled and protected with sprinklers or clean agents. 

v.  The Inert Agents and their application acceptable to Civil Defence are based on 
EPA’s SNAP (Significant New Alternatives Policy) program, as of October 2016. 

vi. The EPA continuously reviews and updates their policy of these alternate substi-
tutes and same shall be adopted by Civil Defence based on their periodic evalua-
tion of environmental and health risks, including factors such as ozone depletion 
potential, global warming potential, toxicity, flammability, exposure potential 
and acceptance in occupied spaces etc., of all the fire suppression agents. 

vii. Where EPA’s SNAP or manufacturers comment or recommend any of the pre-

Install ventilation 
Immediate spillage cleaning in accordance with good hygiene practices 

cautionary and safety measures such as 
a.  Avoid unnecessary exposure 
b.  Asphyxiation at high concentrations 
c.  High CO2 
d.  Low residual oxygen levels 
e.  Container labels of potential hazard and handling procedures to reduce risk 
f.  Only manual activation in occupied areas 
g. 
h. 
i.  Training of the personnel involved 
j.  Eye wash,  
 
for any clean agent, such installations shall not be acceptable in occupied spaces 
unless all of the additional justifications mentioned below are furnished to Civil 
Defence acceptance and approval. 
 
a.  NOC from concerned authority such as Municipality environment control 

department’s disposal of hazardous wastes. 

b.  NOC from concerned authority  such as Health Authority  which ensures that 
the clean agent is not toxic to humans and animals before and after release. 
c.  Manufacturer's training certificate for the engineers and technicians who are 

involved in handling, installing, maintaining and servicing such clean agent 
installations. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 689 of 1348 

 

Table 9.16.E.: Application of Inert Gas Agents 

HALOCARBON 
AGENT 

COMMER-
CIAL NAME 

TECHNICAL INFORMATION 

EPA COMMENTS 

1. IG-01 

Argotec, 
Inert Gas 
Blend C. 

i.  Density- 1.165 kg/m3 
ii.  Does not mix in reservoirs 
iii. Low friction loss 
iv. Cylinder pressure –200 bar 

2. NITROGEN 
     IG 100  

IG 100 
NN 100 

i.  Density- 1.165 kg/m3 
ii.  Does not mix in reservoirs 
iii. Low friction loss 
iv. Cylinder pressure –200 bar 

3 IG 541 

INERGEN 

i.  Density- 1.418 kg/m3 
ii.  Does not mix in reservoirs 
iii. Low friction loss 
iv. Cylinder pressure –300 bar 

4. ARGONITE 
     IG 55 

IG 55 

i.  Density- 1.412 kg/m3 
ii.  Does not mix in reservoirs 
iii. Low friction loss 
iv. Cylinder pressure –300 bar 

v.  Use of this agent should be in 

accordance with the safety 
guidelines in the latest edition 
of the NFPA 2001 Standard for 
Clean Agent. Fire Extinguishing 
Systems.  

vi.  See additional comments i, ii,  

v. in Table 9.16.16. 

v.  Use of this agent should be in 

accordance with the safety 
guidelines in the latest edition 
of the NFPA 2001 Standard for 
Clean Agent. Fire Extinguishing 
Systems.  

vi.  See additional comments i, ii,  

v. in Table 9.16.16. 

v.  Use of this agent should be in 

accordance with the safety 
guidelines in the latest edition 
of the NFPA 2001 Standard for 
Clean Agent Fire Extinguishing 
Systems.  

vi.  This agent contains CO2, which 

is intended to increase blood 
oxygenation and cerebral blood 
flow in low oxygen atmos-
pheres. 

vii.   The design concentration 

should result in no more than 
5% CO2.  

viii. See additional comments i, ii,  

v. in Table 9.16.16. 

v.  Use of this agent should be in 

accordance with the safety 
guidelines in the latest edition 
of the NFPA 2001 Standard for 
Clean Agent. Fire Extinguishing 
Systems.  

vi.  See additional comments i, ii,  

v. in Table 9.16.16. 

FS 0140 
ETC. 

NOT ACCEPTABLE BY CIVIL                 
DEFENCE 

NA 

5. INERT GAS AND 
POWDERED        
AEROSOL 
BLENDS 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 690 of 13483.15.  Other Extinguishing Agents and System 

 
3.15.1. 

 
3.15.2. 

 
3.15.3. 

 
3.15.4. 

 

 

 The requirements for various other Extinguishing System material, design, installa-
tion shall be as per this section and Table 9.17. 

 The fire suppression Agents and their application acceptable to Civil Defence are 
based on EPA’s SNAP (Significant New Alternatives Policy) program, as of October 
2016. 

 The EPA continuously reviews and updates their policy of these alternate substi-
tutes and same shall be adopted by Civil Defence based on their periodic evalua-
tion of environmental and health risks, including factors such as ozone depletion 
potential, global warming potential, toxicity, flammability, exposure potential and 
acceptance in occupied spaces etc., of all the fire suppression agents. 

 Where EPA’s SNAP or manufacturers comment or recommend any of the precau-
tionary and safety measures such as 

a.  Avoid unnecessary exposure 
b.  Asphyxiation at high concentrations 
c.  High CO2 
d.  Low residual oxygen levels 
e.  Container labels of potential hazard and handling procedures to reduce risk 
f.   Only manual activation in occupied areas 
g.  Install ventilation 
h.  Immediate spillage cleaning in accordance with good hygiene practices 
i.   Training of the personnel involved 
g.  Eye wash,  

for any clean agent, such installations shall not be acceptable in occupied spaces 
unless all of the additional justifications mentioned below are furnished to Civil 
Defence acceptance and approval. 

a.  NOC from concerned authority such as Municipality environment control de-

partment’s disposal of hazardous wastes. 

b.  NOC from concerned authority  such as Health Authority  which ensures that 
the clean agent is not toxic to humans and animals before and after release. 
c.   Manufacturer's training certificate for the engineers and technicians who are 
involved in handling, installing, maintaining and servicing such clean agent in-
stallations. 

 

 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 691 of 1348 

Table 9.17.: Other Extinguishing Systems Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

EPA COMMENTS 

i.  Design, Calculations, Design Concentra-

iii. System design must adhere to 

tions, Materials, Installation, Testing, 
Inspection and maintenance shall be as 
per the manufacturer’s instructions and 
listed manual. 

ii.  All the material and design manuals 

shall be listed and approved by Civil De-
fence. 

OSHA 1910.162(b)(5) and NFPA 
Standard 12 

i.  Design, Calculations, Design Concentra-

vi. Use of this agent should be in 

tions, Materials, Installation, Testing, 
Inspection and maintenance shall be as 
per NFPA 2010 and the manufacturer’s 
instructions and listed manual. 

ii.  All the material and design manual shall 
be listed and approved by Civil Defence. 
iii. All system components shall be located 
to maintain no less than minimum clear-
ances from energized electrical parts in 
accordance with ANSI C2, NFPA 70 and 
29 CFR 1910, subpart S. 

iv. Aerosol shall not be installed in the fol-

lowing locations where 
a.  Deep-seated fires in Class A materials 
b.  Certain chemicals or mixtures of 

chemicals, such as cellulose nitrate 
and gunpowder, that are capable of 
rapid oxidation in the absence of air. 
c.  Reactive metals such as lithium, sodi-

um, potassium, magnesium, titani-
um, zirconium, uranium, and plutoni-
um. 

d.  Metal hydrides 
e.  Chemicals capable of undergoing 

autothermal decomposition, such as 
certain organic peroxides and hydra-
zine. 

v.  Condensed aerosol generators shall not 
be used to protect classified hazards or 
similar spaces containing flammable 
liquids or dusts that can be present in 
explosive air–fuel mixtures unless the 
generators are specifically listed for use 
in those environments. 

accordance with the safety 
guidelines in the latest edition 
of the NFPA 2010 standard for 
Aerosol Extinguishing Systems.  
vii. For establishments manufactur-
ing the agent or filling, installing, 
or servicing containers or sys-
tems to be used in total flooding 
applications, EPA recommends 
the following: adequate ventila-
tion should be in place to reduce 
airborne exposure to constitu-
ents of agent; an eye wash foun-
tain and quick drench facility 
should be close to the produc-
tion area; training for safe han-
dling procedures should be pro-
vided to all employees that 
would be likely to handle con-
tainers of the agent or extin-
guishing units filled with the 
agent; workers responsible for 
clean up should allow for maxi-
mum settling of all particulates 
before reentering area and wear 
appropriate protective equip-
ment; and - all spills should be 
cleaned up immediately in ac-
cordance with good industrial 
hygiene practices.  

viii. See additional comments i, ii, 

iii, iv, v. in Table 9.16.16. 

1. CARBON  DIOXIDE 

2.  POWDERED     
AEROSOLS, D 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 692 of 1348 

Table 9.17.: Other Extinguishing Systems Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

EPA COMMENTS 

i.  Conduct an evaluation of foreseeable conditions 

of end use. 

ii.  Determine that the physical or chemical proper-

ties or other technical constraints of the other 
available agents preclude their use. 

iii.   Determine that human exposure to the other 
alternative extinguishing agents may result in 
failure to meet applicable use conditions.  

iv.   Use of this agent should be in accordance with 
the safety guidelines in the latest edition of the 
NFPA 2010 standard for Aerosol Extinguishing 
Systems.  

v.    For establishments manufacturing the agent or 
filling, installing, or servicing containers or sys-
tems to be used in total flooding applications, 
EPA recommends the following: adequate venti-
lation should be in place to reduce airborne ex-
posure to constituents of agent; an eye wash 
fountain and quick drench facility should be 
close to the production area; training for safe 
handling procedures should be provided to all 
employees that would be likely to handle con-
tainers of the agent or extinguishing units filled 
with the agent; workers responsible for clean up 
should allow for maximum settling of all particu-
lates before reentering area and wear appropri-
ate protective equipment; and - all spills should 
be cleaned up immediately in accordance with 
good industrial hygiene practices.  

viii. See additional comments i, ii, iii, iv, v. in Table 

9.16.16. 

NA 

ACCEPTABLE ONLY IN  
UNOCCUPIED AREAS (See 
section 4.1.15.) 

3. OTHER                

POWDERED         
AEROSOLS SUCH 
AS A, C, F, G, E 
AND CONDENSED 
AEROSOL          
SYSTEMS 

4.  MODULAR TYPE                   

NOT ACCEPTABLE BY     
CIVIL DEFENCE 

EXTINGUISHERS 
WITH SPRINKLER 
HEADS OR OTHER 
ACTUATING      
DEVICES 

 

Figure 9.44.: Typical Modular Type Extinguishers which are not Acceptable  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 693 of 1348 

4.   Application of Fire Protection Systems 

 
4.1.  General Requirements 

 

4.1.1. 

The selection and application of Fire Protection systems should be carefully executed 
upon detailed analysis of the Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) of the materials in-
volved in the hazard.  

 
4.1.2.  Water based fire protection systems shall not be installed or used where water reac-

tive materials are stored and handled.  

 
4.1.3.  Medium- and high-expansion foam systems shall not be used on fires in the following 

hazards:                                                  

a.    Chemicals, such as cellulose nitrate, that release sufficient oxygen or other oxidizing 

agents to sustain combustion. 

b.  Energized unenclosed electrical equipment 
c.  Water-reactive metals such as sodium, potassium, and NaK (sodium-potassium alloys) 
d.  Hazardous water-reactive materials, such as triethyl-aluminum and phosphorus pent-

oxide 

e.  Liquefied flammable gas 

 
4.1.4.  All non-storage and non-industrial occupancies with more than 20,000 m² plot area 

(See Definition in Section 4.1.10.) usually with a cluster of all types of buildings shall be 
provided with Yard Fire Hydrant Systems as per Section 3.11.  

 
4.1.5.  Auxiliary Room fire protection Systems as required by Table 9.30. shall be applicable 

and shall be required to be installed only when the main building housing these auxilia-
ry rooms is fully protected by fire protection systems as per Table 9.18. to Table 9.28. 

 
4.1.6.  All storage and industrial occupancies with more than 3600 m² built-up area (See Defi-

nitions in Section 4.1. 11.), or storage and industrial occupancies which have built-up 
ground floor areas that are more than 100 m away from existing, functional and avail-
able hydrant/s  shall be provided with Yard Fire Hydrant Systems as per Section 3.11.  

 
4.1.7. 

Storage and Industrial occupancies having more than 3 floors above the fire access 
Level shall be fully protected with Automatic Sprinkler System, irrespective of their 
built-up areas. 

 
4.1.8.  All High Hazard Industrial, Storage and special purpose occupancies not addressed in 

this code, a Fire risk analysis report of the facility and the required fire suppression 
systems, prepared by the Civil Defence approved House of Expertise shall be furnished 
for Civil Defence review and approval. 

 
4.1.9.  Guidelines in this section are minimum requirements for the application of various Fire 

Protection Systems. The protection criteria, design criteria, required design density, 
types of suppression methods and Fire Pump capacities may vary and shall be verified 
with the Civil Defence engineers and the relevant NFPA references such as NFPA 11, 
NFPA 13, NFPA 14, NFPA 15, NFPA 16, NFPA 20, NFPA 2001, etc. shall be consulted. 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 694 of 1348 

 

4.1.10.  Plot Area 
 

The plot area is the total area available under the ‘Plot Number’, including the ground floor 
area on which buildings and structures are built, set back areas, landscaping areas, parking are-
as and open spaces available part of such that plot area. 

 
4.1.11.  Built-up Area 
 

The total floor areas of the buildings and structures including carpet areas, wall thickness, col-
umn thickness, stair shafts, elevator and service shafts  of all the floors, including mezzanines. 

 
4.1.12.  Built-up ground floor area 
 

The total ground floor area  alone upon which the individual buildings and structures are built. 
It is the total ground floor area of the individual building and structure including carpet areas, 
wall thickness, column thickness, stair shafts, elevator and service shafts  of the ground floor 
alone. 

 
4.1.13.  Sum of built-up ground floor areas 
 

The sum of total ground floor areas  alone upon which the buildings and structures are built. It 
is the accumulative total ground floor area of the various building and structures, within the 
same plot, excluding separated service blocks, security guard house and separated wash-
rooms. 

 
4.1.14.  Unit Compartment Area 
 

The total built-up ground floor area  alone of the individual unit which is separated by adjacent 
units with a fire resistance rated separation. It is the total built-up ground floor area of such an 
individual unit of the multi-unit building or structure. 

 
4.1.15.  Carpet Area 
 

The total occupiable area inside the built-up area, excluding wall thickness, column thickness, 
stair shaft, elevator shaft and service shaft. 

 
4.1.16.  Unoccupied Area 
 

Area that is intended only for equipment and machinery providing services with periodic visits 

by personnel for repair and maintenance.  However,  with respect to the use of Clean agent, 

Aerosols, CO2 and other fire suppression systems, the LV rooms, transformer rooms, telephone 

rooms, generator rooms and other such equipment/  machinery rooms located in the occupied 

buildings or attached to occupied buildings, are not considered as unoccupied areas because of 

the proximity of these rooms to public movement and the  possible adverse effects of fire sup-

pression agents.   

4.1.17.  Common Fire Pump and Fire Water Tank 
 

Where multiple buildings at single plot or multiple plots are owned by a single owner, the fire 

pump set and fire water tank shall be permitted to be common, provided the arrangement 

satisfies the required hydraulic calculations and the involved plots and property are managed 

and maintained  by such single owner. 

4.1.18.  Master Water Tank 
 

Developers are encouraged to consider master water tanks having a size of a minimum of 

500,000 gallons., common to the entire development, from which individual buildings can tap 

from to individual pump rooms and Civil Defence can refill their fire trucks during emergencies 

in that development or nearby developments. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 695 of 1348 

4.   Application of Fire Protection Systems 

 
4.2.  Super Highrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

 
4.2.1. 

Super Highrise buildings having a building height greater than 90 m, of any occu-
pancy classification shall be provided with Fire protection Systems in compliance 
with Table 9.18. and Auxiliary Rooms Fire Protection Systems as per Table 9.30. 

Table 9.18.: Super Highrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

CATEGORY 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

i.  Sprinklers shall be provided 

throughout the building including 
basements and podiums (open as 
well as closed) as per Section 3.5. 
ii.  Auxiliary rooms and various areas 
of the building shall be protected 
as per Table 9.30. 

iii. The wet riser System shall be pro-
vided throughout the building as 
per  Section 3.4. 

iv. Wet risers shall be provided with 
High Zones and Low zones accord-
ing to pressure limitations as per          
Table 9.6.13. 

v.  Wet risers shall be interconnected 
both at the lowest level and at the 
highest level of each zone. 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

ix. Where a fire pump set is combined 
and serves both yard hydrants and 
internal building systems, the capaci-
ty of the first fire pump set at the 
lowest level of the building shall be 
1000 gpm  (Irrespective of number of 
stairs and standpipes) at 17  bar. 

x.  Where a fire pump set is combined 
and serves both yard hydrants and 
internal building systems, the com-
bined water tank at the lowest level 
of the building shall have a capacity 
of 60 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water  level detection, dedi-
cated direct breeching inlet for refill 
and instantaneous refilling arrange-
ment for the utility supply. 

vi. A multi level Pump set arrange-

xi. Where a fire pump set only serves 

ment shall be provided every 90 m 
height from the lowest fire pump 
set level as per Table 9.6.13. 

vii. Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provid-

ed where the plot area exceeds 
20,000 m2 , as per Section 3.11.  

viii.Yard hydrants shall not be re-

quired where infrastructure yard 
hydrants are available within 60 m 
of such towers. Tapping from ex-
isting yard hydrant network shall 
be permitted to extend the yard 
hydrants to comply with coverage 
requirements. 

internal building systems, the capaci-
ty of the pump sets  located vertically 
at every 90 m intermediate intervals 
from the lowest level fire pump shall 
be  750 gpm if there are 2 standpipes 
and 1000  gpm, if there are more than 
2 standpipes, at pressure as required 
to satisfy 6.9 bar at  the most remote 
landing valve. 

xii. Fire water tank shall be provided for 
every upper level pump sets (At eve-
ry 90 m intervals). Such upper level 
water tanks shall be for 30 minutes 
operation, complete with automatic 
low water level detection, instanta-
neous refilling arrangement, pump-
ing and piping to refill tanks from 
lower levels. 

A.  SUPER           
HIGHRISE     
BUILDING WITH 
PLOT AREA           
EXCEEDING 
20,000 M2  

 
 

 

 
 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 696 of 1348 

4.   Application of Fire Protection Systems 

 
4.2.  Super Highrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

 

Table 9.18.: Super Highrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

CATEGORY 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

i.  Sprinklers shall be provided 

throughout the building including 
basements and podiums (open as 
well as closed) as per Section 3.5. 
ii.  Auxiliary rooms and various areas 
of the building shall be protected 
as per Table 9.30. 

iii. The wet riser System shall be pro-
vided throughout the building as 
per  Section 3.4. 

iv. Wet risers shall be provided with 
High Zones and Low zones accord-
ing to pressure limitations as per          
Table 9.6.13. 

v.  Wet risers shall be interconnected 
both at the lowest level and at the 
highest level of each zone. 

vi. A multi level Pump set arrange-

ment shall be provided every 90 m 
height from the lowest fire pump 
set level as per Table 9.6.13. 

x. 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

vii.  The capacity of the first fire pump set 

at the lowest level of the building 
shall be 1000 gpm  (Irrespective of 
the number of standpipes) at 17  bar. 
viii.  The water tank at the lowest level of 
the  building shall have a capacity of 
60 minutes  of operation, complete 
with low water  level detection, dedi-
cated direct breeching inlet for refill 
and instantaneous refilling arrange-
ment for the utility supply.. 

ix.  The capacity of the upper level 

pump sets  located at every 90 m 
intervals from the lowest level fire 
pump, shall be  750 gpm if there 
are 2 standpipes and 1000  gpm if 
there are more than 2 standpipes, 
at pressure as required to satisfy 
6.9 bar at  the most remote land-
ing valve. 
Fire water tank shall be provided 
for every upper level pump sets 
(At every 90 m intervals). Such up-
per level water tanks shall be for 
30 minutes operation, complete 
with automatic low water level 
detection, instantaneous refilling 
arrangement, pumping and piping 
to refill tanks from lower levels. 

 B. SUPER HIGHRISE 
BUILDING WITH 
PLOT AREA LESS 
THAN 20,000 M2         

 

OR  
 
C.  WHERE SUPER      

HIGHRISE    
BUILDING IS    
PROVIDED WITH 
YARD HYDRANT 
SYSTEM,           
IRRESPECTIVE 
OF PLOT  AREA, 
AS PART OF           
INFRASTRUC-
TURE DEVELOP-
MENT 

 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 697 of 1348 

4.3.  Highrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

 
4.3.1.  Highrise building having building height of more than 23 m but less than 90 m, of 

any occupancy classification shall be provided with Fire protection Systems in com-
pliance with Table 9.19. and Auxiliary Rooms Fire Protection Systems as per Table 
9.30 

 
 

Table 9.19.: Highrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

CATEGORY 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP 
SET AND FIRE WATER 
TANK CAPACITIES 

A.  HIGHRISE  BUILDING     

HAVING HEIGHT OF MORE 
THAN 45 M BUT BELOW 
90 M FROM LOWEST 
PUMP SET  LEVEL  

 
AND 
 
     PLOT  AREA EXCEEDING 

20,000 M2 

 

 

B. HIGHRISE  BUILDING     

HAVING HEIGHT OF MORE 
THAN 45 M BUT BELOW   
90 M FROM LOWEST 
PUMP SET  LEVEL  

 
AND  
 
     PLOT AREA LESS THAN 

20,000 M2 

 
 
 
      

 

i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-
out the building including basements 
and podiums (open as well as closed) 
as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  Auxiliary rooms and various areas of 

the building shall be protected as per             
Table 9.30. 

iii. The wet riser System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per       
Section 3.4. 

iv. The wet risers shall be provided with 
looped High Zones and Low zones ac-
cording to the pressure limitations as 
per Table 9.6.13. 

v.  Wet risers shall be interconnected 

both at lowest level and at the highest 
level of each zone. 

vi. Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided 

as per Section 3.11. 

vii. Yard hydrants shall not be required 
where infrastructure yard hydrants 
are available within 60 m of such tow-
ers. Tapping from existing yard hy-
drant network shall be permitted to 
extend the yard hydrants to comply 
with coverage requirements. 

i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-
out the building including basements 
and podiums (Open as well as closed) 
as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  Auxiliary rooms and various areas of 

viii.  Where a fire pump set 
is combined and serves 
yard hydrants and inter-
nal building systems, 
the capacity of the fire 
pump set shall be 1000 
gpm (Irrespective of 
number of stairs) at 
pressure as required to 
satisfy 6.9 bar at the 
most remote landing 
valve. 

ix.  Where a fire pump set 
is combined and serves 
yard hydrants and inter-
nal building systems, 
the combined water 
tank shall have capacity 
of 60 minutes of opera-
tion, complete with low 
water level detection, 
dedicated direct 
breeching inlet for refill-
ing and instantaneous 
refilling arrangement 
for the utility supply.  

vi.  The capacity of the fire 
pump set shall be 750 
gpm if there are 2 stand-
pipes and 1000 gpm if 
there are more than 2 
standpipes, at pressure 
as required to satisfy 6.9 
bar at the most remote 
landing valve. 

vii.  Water tank shall have 

capacity of 60 minutes of 
operation, complete 
with low water level de-
tection, dedicated direct 
breeching inlet for refill-
ing and instantaneous 
refilling arrangement for 
the utility water supply. 

the building shall be protected as per             
Table 9.30. 

iii. A wet riser System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Sec-
tion 3.4. 

iv. The wet risers shall be provided with 
High Zones and Low zones according 
to pressure limitations as per Table 
9.6.13. 

v.  The wet risers shall be interconnected 
both at lowest level and at the highest 
level of each zone. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 698 of 1348 

 

Table 9.19.: Highrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

CATEGORY 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

C.  HIGHRISE  BUILDING 
HAVING HEIGHT OF 
MORE THAN 23 M 
BUT BELOW 45 M AND 
PLOT AREA                 
EXCEEDING  20,000 M2 

 
 

i.  Sprinklers shall be provided 

throughout the building including 
basements and podiums (open as 
well as closed) as per   Section 3.5. 
ii.  Auxiliary rooms and various areas 
of the building shall be protected 
as per Table 9.30. 

iii. A wet riser System shall be provid-

ed throughout the building as per                  
Section 3.4. 

iv. The wet risers shall be intercon-

nected both at lowest level and at 
the highest level of each zone. 

v.  Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provid-

ed as per Section 3.11. 

vi. Yard hydrants shall not be required 
where infrastructure yard hydrants 
are available within 60 m of such 
towers. 

D.  HIGHRISE BUILDING          

i.  Sprinklers shall be provided 

HAVING HEIGHT OF 
MORE THAN 23 M 
BUT BELOW 45 M  
AND PLOT AREA LESS 
THAN 20,000 M2 

throughout the building including 
basements and podiums (open as 
well as closed) as per Section 3.5. 
ii.  Auxiliary rooms and various areas 
of the building shall be protected 
as per Table 9.30. 

iii. A wet riser System shall be provid-

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET 
AND FIRE WATER TANK     
CAPACITIES 

vii.  Where a fire pump set is com-

bined and serves yard hy-
drants and internal building 
systems, capacity of the fire 
pump set shall be 1000 gpm 
irrespective of number of 
standpipes, at pressure as 
required to satisfy 6.9 bar at 
the most remote landing 
valve and the yard hydrant. 

viii.  The combined water tank 
shall have capacity of 60 
minutes of operation, com-
plete with low water level 
detection, dedicated direct 
breeching inlet for refilling 
and instantaneous refilling 
arrangement for utility water 
supply. 

v. 

The capacity of the fire pump 
set shall be 750 gpm if the 
building has 2 standpipes and 
1000 gpm if the building has 
more than 2 standpipes. 

vi.  Pressure shall be as required to 

satisfy 6.9 bar at the most re-
mote landing valve. 

vii.  The water tank shall have a 

capacity of 60 minutes of oper-
ation, complete with low water 
level detection, dedicated di-
rect breeching inlet and instan-
taneous refilling arrangement 
for utility water supply.. 

ed throughout the building as per                  
Section 3.4. 

iv. The wet risers shall be intercon-

nected both at lowest level and at 
the highest level of each zone. 

 

Points to Ponder 

Photo Caption 
 

In some of the full scale fires, a water tank meant for 60 minutes of operation du-

ration, was emptied in 15 minutes due to the operation (bursting, activation and 

spraying) of several sprinklers, quickly exceeding the design area of the sprinkler 

operation. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 699 of 1348 

4.4.  Midrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

 
4.4.1.  Midrise buildings (Assembly, Education, Healthcare, Mercantile, Hotel, Daycare, 

Mixed and Multiple and High depth underground buildings) having a building 
height from more than 15 m to less than 23 m shall be provided with Fire protec-
tion Systems in compliance with Table 9.20.a., and Auxiliary Rooms Fire Protection 
Systems as per Table 9.30. 

 

PREDOMINANT 
OCCUPANCY 

A.  ASSEMBLY  

GROUP A, B, C.  

 
B.  EDUCATION  

GROUP A, B, C.  

 
C.  HEALTHCARE  

Table 9.20.a.: Midrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET 
AND FIRE WATER TANK                    
CAPACITIES 

1. IF PLOT AREA IS LESS THAN       

20,000  m2 

1. IF PLOT AREA IS LESS THAN     

20,000 m2 

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

 
v.   The capacity of the fire pump set 

MULTIPLE          
OCCUPANCIES  

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

 
vi.  Where a fire pump set is combined 

out the building including base-
ments, podiums (Open as well as 
closed) as per Section 3.5. 

GROUP A  

ii.  Auxiliary rooms and various areas of 

 
D.  MERCANTILE       

GROUP A, B 

 
E.  HOTEL           

the building shall be protected as per         
Table 9.30. 

iii. A wet riser System shall be provided 
throughout the building as per             
Section 3.4. 

GROUP A, B, C.  

iv. The wet risers shall be interconnect-

 
F.  DAY CARE GROUP 

A, B, C.  

 
G.  MIXED AND   

ed at the highest level. 

 
 
2. IF PLOT AREA IS MORE THAN 

20,000m2   

 
H.  HIGH DEPTH      

UNDERGROUND 
BUILDINGS  OR         
BUILDINGS WITH  
3 OR MORE       
BASEMENTS 

out the building including base-
ments, podiums (Open as well as 
closed) as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  Auxiliary rooms and various areas of 

the building shall be protected as per         
Table 9.30. 

iii. A wet riser System shall be provided 
throughout the building as per             
Section 3.4. 

iv. The wet risers shall be interconnect-

ed at the highest level. 

v.  Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided 

as per Section 3.11. 

vi. Yard hydrants shall not be required 
where infrastructure yard hydrants 
are available within 60 m of such 
building. In this scenario, require-
ments of Table 9.20.a.1. shall apply. 

 
 

 

 

shall be 750 gpm if there are 2 
standpipes, 1000 gpm if there are 
more than 2 standpipes at a pres-
sure as required to satisfy 6.9 bar 
at the most remote landing valve. 
vi.  The water tank shall have a capaci-
ty of 45 minutes of operation, com-
plete with low water level detec-
tion, dedicated direct breeching 
inlet for refilling and instantaneous 
refilling arrangement for utility wa-
ter supply.. 

 
2. IF PLOT AREA IS MORE THAN 

20,000 m2  

and serves yard hydrants and in-
ternal building systems, capacity 
of the fire pump set shall be 1000 
gpm irrespective of number of 
standpipes at pressure as required 
to satisfy 6.9 bar at the most re-
mote landing valve and the hy-
drant. 

vii.  Where a fire pump set is com-

bined and serves yard hydrants 
and internal building systems, the 
combined water tank shall have 
capacity of 60 minutes of opera-
tion, complete with low water 
level detection, dedicated direct 
breeching inlet for refilling and 
instantaneous refilling arrange-
ment for utility water supply. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 700 of 1348 

4.4.  Midrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

 
4.4.2.  Midrise buildings (Residential, Labour Accommodation, Staff Accommodation, Hos-

tels, Business and Animal Housing) having a building height from more than 15 m 
to less than 23 m shall be provided with Fire protection Systems in compliance 
with Table 9.20.b., and Auxiliary Rooms Fire Protection Systems as per Table 9.30. 

Table 9.20.b. : Midrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

PRE         
DOMINANT          
OCCUPANCY 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

1.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA 

IS UP TO 900  m2 

1.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA IS 

UP TO 900  m2 

 
i.  The dry riser + Hose Reel system  
shall be provided throughout the 
building as per Section 3.2. and Sec-
tion 3.3. 

ii.  Dry risers shall be interconnected at 

 
iii. The capacity of the fire pump set shall 
be 50 gpm at a pressure as required to 
satisfy 4.5 bar at the most remote Hose 
valve. 

iv. The water tank shall have capacity of 45 

A.    RESIDENTIAL 
GROUP A, B, 
C.  

 
(APARTMENTS, 
LABOR ACCOM-
MODATION, 
STAFF                 
ACCOMMODA-
TION,                    
HOSTEL ) 
 
B.   HEALTHCARE 
GROUP B, C.  

 
C.   MERCANTILE 

GROUP C 
(KIOSKS) 

 
D.   BUSINESS      
GROUP A, B, 
C.  

 
E.   ANIMAL 

HOUSING 
GROUP A, B, 
C.  

 
 

 

 

 

the highest level. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
2.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA 

IS 901  m2 TO 3600 m2 

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the building including base-
ments and podiums (open as well as 
closed) as per  Section 3.5. 

ii.  Auxiliary rooms and various areas of 

the building shall be protected as 
per Table 9.30. 

iii. The dry riser + hose reel system shall 
be provided throughout the building 
as per Section 3.2. and Section 3.3. 
iv. Dry risers shall be interconnected at 

the highest level. 

 
 
3.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA 

IS MORE THAN 3600  m2 

i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the building including base-
ments and podiums (open as well as 
closed) as per  Section 3.5. 

ii.  A wet riser System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Sec-
tion 3.4. 

iii. Wet risers shall be interconnected at 

the highest level. 

iv. Auxiliary rooms and various areas of 

the building shall be protected as 
per  Table 9.30. 

minutes of operation, complete with 
low water level detection, dedicated 
direct breeching inlet for refilling  and 
instantaneous refilling arrangement for 
utility water supply. 

 
 
2.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA IS 

901  m2 TO 3600 m2 

 
v.  The capacity of the fire pump set shall 
be 300 gpm at pressure as required to 
satisfy 4.5 bar at the most remote Hose 
reel. 

vi.  Water tank shall have capacity of 45 
minutes of operation, complete with 
low water level detection, dedicated 
direct breeching inlet for refilling and 
instantaneous refilling arrangement for 
utility water supply. 

 
 
 
 
3.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA IS 

MORE THAN 3600  m2 

 
v.  Capacity of the fire pump set shall be 

750 gpm if there are 2 standpipes, 1000 
gpm if there are more than 2 standpipes 
at pressure as required to satisfy 6.9 bar 
at the most remote Landing valve. 

vi.  Water tank shall have capacity of 45 
minutes of operation, complete with 
low water level detection, dedicated 
direct breeching inlet for refilling and 
instantaneous refilling arrangement for 
utility water supply. 

 
 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 701 of 1348 

Table 9.20.b. : Midrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

PRE         
DOMINANT          
OCCUPANCY 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

4.  IF PLOT AREA IS MORE THAN        

20,000 m2   

 
vi.    Where a fire pump set is combined 

and serves yard hydrants and internal 
building systems, the combined fire 
pump capacity shall be 1000 gpm.  
vii.   Where fire pumpset independently 
serves only the yard fire hydrants, 
pump capacity shall be 1000 gpm. 

viii.   Fire water tank shall have capacity of 

60 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, dedi-
cated direct breeching inlet and in-
stantaneous refilling arrangement.  

4.  IF PLOT AREA IS MORE THAN 

20,000  m2   

 
i.  Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided 

as per Section 3.11. 

ii.  Yard hydrants shall not be required 
where infrastructure yard hydrants 
are available within 60 m of such 
building. In this scenario, require-
ments of Table 9.20.b.3. shall apply. 
iii. Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the building including base-
ments and podiums (open as well as 
closed) as per  Section 3.5. in ac-
cordance with Table 9.20.b.1., 2., or 
3., as applicable. 

iv. A wet riser System or hose reel sys-
tem shall be provided throughout 
the building in accordance with Ta-
ble 9.20.b.1., 2., or 3., as applicable. 
v.  Auxiliary rooms and various areas of 

the building shall be protected as 
per  Table 9.30. 

A.    RESIDENTIAL 
GROUP A, B, 
C.  

 
(APARTMENTS, 
LABOR ACCOM-
MODATION, 
STAFF                 
ACCOMMODA-
TION,                    
HOSTEL ) 
 
B.   HEALTHCARE 
GROUP B, C.  

 
C.   MERCANTILE 

GROUP C 
(KIOSKS) 

 
D.   BUSINESS      
GROUP A, B, 
C.  

 
E.   ANIMAL 

HOUSING 
GROUP A, B, 
C.  

 

 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 702 of 1348 

4.4.  Midrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

 
4.4.3.  Midrise buildings having a building height from more than 15 m to less than 23 m 

and having a single exit stair and built-up ground floor area of up to 500 m2 shall be 
provided with Fire protection Systems in compliance with Table 9.20.c., and Auxil-
iary Rooms Fire Protection Systems as per Table 9.30. 

Table 9.20.c.: Midrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

1. IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA 
IS UPTO 500 M2 AND A SINGLE EXIT 
STAIR 

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-
out the building including basements 
and podiums (open as well as closed) 
as per  Section 3.5. 

ii.  A wet riser System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Sec-
tion 3.4. 

iii. Wet risers shall be interconnected at 

the highest level. 

iv. Auxiliary rooms and various areas of 

the building shall be protected as per  
Table 9.30. 

  

 
(APARTMENTS, LA-
BOR ACCOMMODA-
TION, STAFF                 
ACCOMMODATION,                    
HOSTEL ) 
 
HAVING GROUND 
FLOOR BUILT-UP   
AREA OF UPTO      
500 m2 AND A SINGLE   
EXIT STAIR 
 
B.   BUSINESS      

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET 
AND FIRE WATER TANK                    
CAPACITIES 

1. IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA 

IS UPTO 500 M2 AND A SINGLE 
EXIT STAIR 

 
v.  Capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be 500 gpm at pressure as required 
to satisfy 6.9 bar at the most re-
mote Landing valve. 

vi.  Water tank shall have capacity of 
45 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, 
dedicated direct breeching inlet for 
refilling and instantaneous refilling 
arrangement for utility water sup-
ply. 

 
 

PREDOMINANT 
OCCUPANCY 

A.    RESIDENTIAL 

GROUP A, B, C.  

GROUP A, B, C.  

 
HAVING GROUND 
FLOOR BUILT-UP   
AREA OF UPTO      
500 m2 AND A SINGLE   
EXIT STAIR 
 
C.  ANIMAL HOUS-

ING GROUP A, B, 
C.  

 
HAVING GROUND 
FLOOR BUILT-UP   
AREA OF UPTO 500 
m2 AND A SINGLE   
EXIT STAIR 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 703 of 1348 

4.4.  Midrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

 
4.4.4.  Midrise buildings (Detention and Correctional, Prisons) having a building height 

from more than 15 m to less than 23 m shall be provided with Fire protection Sys-
tems in compliance with Table 9.20.d., and Auxiliary Rooms Fire Protection Sys-
tems as per Table 9.30. 

 
 

Table 9.20.d.: Midrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

PREDOMINANT 
OCCUPANCY 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

A.    DETENTION AND 

CORRECTIONAL 
GROUP A, B, C.  

1. FOR CELLS AND INMATES AREAS 
 
i.  Pre-action type Sprinklers shall be 

provided throughout as per Section 
3.7. 

 
2. FOR AREAS OTHER THAN CELLS AND 

INMATES AREAS 

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-
out the building including basements 
and podiums (open as well as closed) 
as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  Auxiliary rooms and various areas of 

the building shall be protected as per         
Table 9.30. 

iii. A wet riser System shall be provided 
throughout the building as per             
Section 3.4. 

iv. The wet risers shall be interconnect-

ed at the highest level. 

v.  Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided 

as per Section 3.11. 

vi. Yard hydrants shall not be required 
where infrastructure yard hydrants 
are available within 60 m of such 
towers. Tapping from existing yard 
hydrant network shall be permitted 
to extend the yard hydrants to com-
ply with coverage requirements. 

 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET 
AND FIRE WATER TANK                    
CAPACITIES 

vii.  Where a fire pump set is com-

bined and serves yard hydrants 
and internal building systems, 
the capacity of the fire pump set 
shall  be 1000 gpm (irrespective 
of number of standpipes) at a 
pressure as required to satisfy 
6.9 bar at the most remote land-
ing valve and the hydrant. 

viii.  Where a fire pump set serves 

yard hydrants and internal build-
ing systems, the combined water 
tank shall have a capacity of  60 
minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, 
dedicated direct breeching inlet 
for refilling and  instantaneous 
refilling arrangement for utility 
water supply. 

ix.  Where a fire pump set serves 
only internal building systems, 
the capacity of the fire pump set 
shall be 750 gpm if building  has 2 
standpipes and 1000 gpm if  t h e  
building has more than 2  stand-
pipes. Pressure shall be as re-
quired to satisfy 6.9 bar at the 
most  remote landing valve. 

x.  Where a fire pump set serves 
only internal building systems, 
the water tank shall have a ca-
pacity of 60 minutes of opera-
tion, complete with low  water 
level detection, dedicated direct 
breeching inlet fo r refilling 
and instantaneous refilling  ar-
rangement for utility water sup-
ply.  

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 704 of 1348 

4.5.  Lowrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

 
4.5.1. 

Lowrise buildings having building height of up to 15 m and low depth underground 
buildings or basements shall be provided with Fire protection Systems in compli-
ance with Table 9.21.a. and Auxiliary Rooms Fire Protection Systems as per Table 
9.30. 

Table 9.21.a: Lowrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

PREDOMINANT 
OCCUPANCY 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

A.  ASSEMBLY  

GROUP A, B, C.  

 
B.  EDUCATION  

GROUP A, B, C.  

 
C.  HEALTHCARE  

GROUP A,  

 
D.  MERCANTILE        

GROUP A, B 

 
E.  HOTEL           

GROUP A, B, C.  

 
F.  DAY CARE GROUP 

A, B, C.  

 
G.   DETENTION AND 
CORRECTIONAL 
GROUP A, B, C.  

 
H.  MIXED AND   

MULTIPLE          
OCCUPANCIES  

 
I.   LOW DEPTH      

UNDERGROUND 
BUILDINGS  OR         
BUILDINGS WITH  
2 OR LESS       
BASEMENTS 

 

quired. 

 
 
3.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR    
AREA IS MORE THAN 3600 m2 

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided 

1.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR    

AREA IS UP TO 500 m2 

 
i.  Hose Reel System shall be provid-
ed throughout the building as per  
Section 3.3. 

ii.  Dry landing valves shall not be re-

quired. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR    

AREA IS 501  m2 TO 3600 m2 

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided 

throughout the building including 
basements and podiums (open as 
well as closed) as per  Section 3.5. 
ii.  Auxiliary rooms and various areas 
of the building shall be protected 
as per Table 9.30. 

iii. Hose reel system shall be provided 

throughout the building as per 
Section 3.3. 

iv. Dry landing valves shall not be re-

throughout the building including 
basements and podiums (open as 
well as closed) as per Section 3.5. 
ii.  Auxiliary rooms and various areas 
of the building shall be protected 
as per Table 9.30. 

iii. Wet riser System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per              
Section 3.4. 

iv. Wet risers shall be interconnected 

at the highest level. 

1.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA 

IS UP TO 500  m2 

 
iii.  The capacity of the fire pump set 
shall be 50 gpm at pressure as re-
quired to satisfy 4.5 bar at the most 
remote Hose reel outlet valve.. 

iv.  The water tank shall have capacity of 

30 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection and 
instantaneous refilling arrangement 
for utility water supply. 

v.  Fire Pump and/or Fire water tank 

shall be permitted to be installed on 
the roof, if existing structure is capa-
ble of accommodating such addition-
al load. 

 
2.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA 

IS 501  m2 TO 3600 m2 

 
v. The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be 300 gpm at pressure as required 
to satisfy 4.5 bar at the most remote 
Hose reel outlet valve.. 

vi.  The water tank shall have capacity of 

30 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection and 
instantaneous refilling arrangement 
for utility water supply. 

 
 
 
3.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA 

IS MORE THAN 3600 m2 

 
v.   The capacity of the fire pump set 

shall be 750 gpm if there are 2 stand-
pipes and 1000 gpm if there are 
more than 2 standpipes at pressure 
as required to satisfy 6.9 bar at the 
most remote Landing Valve. 

vi. The water tank shall have capacity of 

30 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, dedi-
cated direct breeching inlet for refill-
ing and instantaneous refilling ar-
rangement for utility water supply. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 705 of 1348 

4.5.  Lowrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

 
4.5.1. 

Lowrise buildings having building height of up to 15 m and low depth underground 
buildings or basements shall be provided with Fire protection Systems in compli-
ance with Table 9.21.a. and Auxiliary Rooms Fire Protection Systems as per Table 
9.30. 

Table 9.21.a: Lowrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK       CAPACI-
TIES 

4.  IF PLOT AREA IS MORE THAN   

20,000  m2   

 
v.     Where a fire pump set is combined 
and serves yard hydrants and inter-
nal building systems, the capacity of 
the fire pump set shall be 1000 gpm 
irrespective of number of stand-
pipes at pressure as required to 
satisfy 6.9 bar at the most remote 
landing valve and hydrant valve. 
vi.    Where fire pump set is combined 

and serves yard hydrants and inter-
nal fire systems, the combined wa-
ter tank shall have a capacity of 60 
minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, 
dedicated direct breeching inlet 
and instantaneous refilling arrange-
ment.  

PREDOMINANT 
OCCUPANCY 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

A.  ASSEMBLY  

GROUP A, B, C.  

 
B.  EDUCATION  

GROUP A, B, C.  

 
C.  HEALTHCARE  

GROUP A,  

 
D.  MERCANTILE        

GROUP A, B 

 
E.  HOTEL           

4.  IF PLOT AREA IS MORE THAN 

20,000  m2   

 
i.  Sprinklers, hose reels or and wet 

risers shall be provided throughout 
the building including basements 
and podiums (open as well as 
closed) in accordance with Table 
9.21.a. 1., 2., or 3., as applicable. 
ii.  Auxiliary rooms and various areas 
of the building shall be protected 
as per Table 9.30. 

iii. Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provid-

GROUP A, B, C.  

ed as per Section 3.11. 

iv. Yard hydrants shall not be re-

quired where infrastructure yard 
hydrants are available within 60 m 
of such building. Tapping from ex-
isting yard hydrant network shall 
be permitted to extend the yard 
hydrants to comply with coverage 
requirements. In this scenario, re-
quirements of Table 9.21.a.4.i. 
shall apply. 

 
F.  DAY CARE GROUP 

A, B, C.  

 
G.  MIXED AND   

MULTIPLE          
OCCUPANCIES  

 
H.  LOW DEPTH      

UNDERGROUND 
BUILDINGS  OR         
 
 
BUILDINGS WITH  
 
2 OR LESS       
BASEMENTS 
 

 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 706 of 1348 

4.5.  Lowrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

 
4.5.2. 

Lowrise buildings having building height of up to 15 m and low depth underground 
buildings or basements shall be provided with Fire protection Systems in compli-
ance with Table 9.21.b. and Auxiliary Rooms Fire Protection Systems as per Table 
9.30. 

Table 9.21.b.: Lowrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

PREDOMINANT 
OCCUPANCY 

A.    RESIDENTIAL 

GROUP A, B, C.  

 
(APARTMENTS,     
LABOR ACCOMMO-
DATION, STAFF                 
ACCOMMODATION,                    
HOSTEL) 
 
B.   HEALTHCARE 
GROUP B, C.  

 
C.   BUSINESS      

GROUP A, B, C.  

 
D.   ANIMAL       

HOUSING GROUP 
A, B, C.  

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

1.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR  

AREA IS UP TO 3600 m2 

 
i.  Hose Reel System shall be provid-
ed throughout the building as per  
Section 3.3. 

ii.  Dry landing valves shall not be 

required. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR  
AREA IS MORE THAN 3600 m2 

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

1.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA IS 

UP TO 3600 m2 

 
iii.  The capacity of the fire pump set 
shall be 50 gpm at pressure as re-
quired to satisfy 4.5 bar at the most 
remote Hose reel outlet valve.. 

iv.  The water tank shall have capacity of 

30 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection and 
instantaneous refilling arrangement 
for utility water supply. 

v.  Fire Pump and/or Fire water tank 

shall be permitted to be installed on 
the roof, if existing structure is capa-
ble of accommodating such additional 
load. 

 
2.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA IS 

MORE THAN 3600 m2 

 
v.   The capacity of the fire pump set 

shall be 750 gpm if there are 2 stand-
pipes and 1000 gpm if there are more 
than 2 standpipes at pressure as re-
quired to satisfy 6.9 bar at the most 
remote Landing Valve. 

vi. The water tank shall have capacity of 

30 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, dedi-
cated direct breeching inlet for refill-
ing and instantaneous refilling ar-
rangement for utility water supply. 

throughout the building including 
basements and podiums (open as 
well as closed) as per Section 3.5. 
ii.  Auxiliary rooms and various areas 
of the building shall be protected 
as per Table 9.30. 

iii. Wet riser System shall be provid-

ed throughout the building as per              
Section 3.4. 

iv. Wet risers shall be interconnected 

at the highest level. 

 
 
 

 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 707 of 1348 
(APARTMENTS,     
LABOR ACCOMMO-
DATION, STAFF                 
ACCOMMODATION,                    
HOSTEL ) 
 
B.   HEALTHCARE 
GROUP B, C.  

 
i.  Sprinklers, hose reels or and wet 
risers shall be provided through-
out the building including base-
ments and podiums (open as well 
as closed) in accordance with Ta-
ble 9.21.a. 1., 2., or 3., as applica-
ble. 

ii.  Auxiliary rooms and various areas 
of the building shall be protected 
as per Table 9.30. 

iii. Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provid-

ed as per Section 3.11. 

iv. Yard hydrants shall not be re-

quired where infrastructure yard 
hydrants are available within 60 m 
of such building. Tapping from 
existing yard hydrant network 
shall be permitted to extend the 
yard hydrants to comply with cov-
erage requirements. In this sce-
nario, requirements of Table 
9.21.b.3.i shall apply. 

 
 

 
vii.   Where a fire pump set is combined 
and serves yard hydrants and inter-
nal building systems, the capacity of 
the fire pump set shall be 1000 gpm 
irrespective of number of stand-
pipes at pressure as required to 
satisfy 6.9 bar at the most remote 
landing valve and hydrant valve. 

viii.   Where fire pump set is combined 

and serves yard hydrants and inter-
nal fire systems, the combined wa-
ter tank shall have a capacity of 60 
minutes of operation, complete with 
low water level detection, dedicated 
direct breeching inlet for refilling 
and instantaneous refilling arrange-
ment for utility water supply.  

 

4.5.  Lowrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

 
4.5.2. 

PREDOMINANT 
OCCUPANCY 

A.    RESIDENTIAL 

GROUP A, B, C.  

Lowrise buildings having building height of up to 15 m and low depth underground 
buildings or basements shall be provided with Fire protection Systems in compli-
ance with Table 9.21.b. and Auxiliary Rooms Fire Protection Systems as per Table 
9.30. 

Table 9.21.b.: Lowrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

3.  IF PLOT AREA IS MORE THAN 

20,000  m2   

3.  IF PLOT AREA IS MORE THAN    

20,000  m2   

 
C.   BUSINESS      

GROUP A, B, C.  

 
D.   ANIMAL       

HOUSING GROUP 
A, B, C.  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 708 of 1348 

4.5.  Lowrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

 
4.5.3. 

Lowrise buildings having building height of up to 15 m and low depth underground 
buildings or basements but single exit stair shall be provided with Fire protection 
Systems in compliance with Table 9.21.c. and Auxiliary Rooms Fire Protection Sys-
tems as per Table 9.30. 

Table 9.21.c.: Lowrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

1.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR  

AREA IS UP TO 500 m2 

 
i.  Hose Reel System shall be provid-
ed throughout the building as per 
Section 3.3. 

ii.  Dry landing valves shall not be 

required. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR  
AREA IS MORE THAN 500 m2 

 
 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided 

throughout the building including 
basements and podiums (open as 
well as closed) as per Section 3.5. 
ii.  Auxiliary rooms and various areas 
of the building shall be protected 
as per Table 9.30. 

iii. Hose Reel System shall be provid-
ed throughout the building as per 
Section 3.3. 

iv. Dry landing valves shall not be 

required. 

PREDOMINANT 
OCCUPANCY 

A. RESIDENTIAL 

GROUP A 

     (APARTMENTS) 
     
WITH SINGLE EXIT 
STAIR COMPLYING 
TO CHAPTER 3,                          
Table 3.24.2.1. 
 
 
B. BUSINESS              

GROUP A, B, C 

      
WITH SINGLE EXIT 
STAIR COMPLYING 
TO CHAPTER 3,                          
Table 3.19. 2.  
 
C.  MERCANTILE        

GROUP A, B 

 
WITH SINGLE EXIT 
STAIR COMPLYING 
TO CHAPTER 3,                          
Table 3.32.5. 
 
 
D.  HOTEL           

 
 
 
 
 

GROUP A, B, C.  

 
WITH SINGLE EXIT 
STAIR 
 

 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

1.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR  AREA 

IS UP TO 500 m2 

 
iii. Capacity of the fire pump set shall be 

50 gpm at pressure as required to 
satisfy 4.5 bar at the most remote 
Hose Outlet. 

iv. Water tank shall have capacity of 30 
minutes of operation, complete with 
low water level detection, dedicated 
direct breeching inlet for refilling and 
instantaneous refilling arrangement 
for utility water supply. 

v.  Fire Pump and/or Fire water tank 

shall be permitted to be installed on 
the roof, if existing structure is capa-
ble of accommodating such additional 
load. 

 
2.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR  AREA 

IS MORE THAN 500 m2 

 
 
v. Capacity of the fire pump set shall be 

300 gpm at pressure as required to 
satisfy 4.5 bar at the most remote 
Hose Outlet. 

vi. Water tank shall have capacity of 30 
minutes of operation, complete with 
low water level detection, dedicated 
direct breeching inlet for refilling and 
instantaneous refilling arrangement 
for utility water supply. 

vii. Fire Pump and/or Fire water tank 

shall be permitted to be installed on 
the roof, if existing structure is capa-
ble of accommodating such additional 
load. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 709 of 1348 

4.5.  Lowrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

 
4.5.4. 

Lowrise existing villas converted to commercial outlets shall be provided with Fire 
protection Systems in compliance with Table 9.21.d. and Auxiliary Rooms Fire Pro-
tection Systems as per Table 9.30. 

Table 9.21.d.: Lowrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

1.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR    

AREA IS LESS THAN 900 M2             
IRRESPECTIVE OF NUMBER OF 
STAIRS 

 
i.  Fire Extinguishers as per Chapter 

4. 

 
 
2.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AR-

EA IS MORE THAN 900 M2  BUT 
TWO EXIT STAIRS ARE AVAILABLE 

 
i.  Fire Extinguishers as per Chapter 

4. 

 
 
 
3.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR    

AREA IS MORE THAN 900 M2  AND 
SECOND EXIT STAIR IS NOT  
AVAILABLE 

 
i.  It is highly recommended to the 
owner to consider providing se-
cond exit stair externally from first 
floor.                                                 
OR  

ii.  It is highly recommended to con-

sider providing automatic sprinkler 
system  throughout the building 
including basements as per Sec-
tion 3.5. and Hose Reel System as 
per Section 3.3. 

1.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA IS 
LESS THAN 900 M2                                   
IRRESPECTIVE OF NUMBER OF STAIRS 

 
NA 
 
 
 
2.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA IS 

MORE THAN 900 M2  BUT TWO EXIT 
STAIRS ARE AVAILABLE 

 
NA 
 
 
 
3.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA IS 

MORE THAN 900 M2  AND SECOND EXIT 
STAIR IS NOT AVAILABLE 

 
iii.   Where automatic sprinkler system is 

considered, the capacity of the fire 
pump set shall be 250 gpm with pres-
sure of 4.5 bar available at most remote 
hose reel outlet. 

iv.   The water tank shall have capacity of 30 

minutes of operation, complete with 
low water level detection and instanta-
neous refilling arrangement. 

v.    Fire Pump and/or Fire water tank shall 

be permitted to be installed on the roof, 
if existing structure is capable of accom-
modating such additional load. 

PREDOMINANT 
OCCUPANCY 

A.  EXISTING       

VILLAS (G+1)        

 
CONVERTED TO 
NURSERIES,  
CLINICS, 
DAY CARE       
CENTERS, 
RESTAURANTS, 
SHOW ROOMS, 
BOUTIQUES OR 
SUCH               
COMMERCIAL 
OUTLETS 
 

 
 
 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 710 of 1348 

4.5.  Lowrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

 
4.5.5. 

Lowrise villas, business and mosques having commercial and mercantile outlets 
attached to it or in the same plot shall be provided with Fire protection Systems in 
compliance with Table 9.21.e. and Auxiliary Rooms Fire Protection Systems as per 
Table 9.30. 

Table 9.21.e.: Lowrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

PREDOMINANT 
OCCUPANCY 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

1.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR    AREA OF 

THE COMMERCIAL    OUTLET IS UPTO 
900 M2              

 
iv. Capacity of the fire pump set shall be 50 
gpm at pressure as required to satisfy 4.5 
bar at the most remote Hose Outlet. 
v. Water tank shall have capacity of 30 

minutes of operation, complete with low 
water level detection, dedicated direct 
breeching inlet for refilling and instanta-
neous refilling arrangement for utility 
water supply. 

vi. Fire Pump and/or Fire water tank shall 

be permitted to be installed on the roof, 
if  structure is capable of accommodating 
such additional load. 

 
 
2. 

IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA OF 
THE COMMERCIAL OUTLET IS MORE 
THAN 900 M2   

 
vi. Capacity of the fire pump set shall be 300 
gpm at pressure as required to satisfy 4.5 
bar at the most remote Hose Outlet. 
vi. Water tank shall have capacity of 30 

minutes of operation, complete with low 
water level detection, dedicated direct 
breeching inlet for refilling and instanta-
neous refilling arrangement for utility 
water supply. 

vii. Fire Pump and/or Fire water tank shall 

be permitted to be installed on the roof, 
if structure is capable of accommodating 
such additional load. 

1.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR    
AREA OF THE COMMERCIAL    
OUTLET IS UPTO 900 M2              

 
i.  Hose Reel System shall be provid-
ed throughout the building as per 
Section 3.3. 

ii.  Dry landing valves shall not be re-

quired. 

iii. Hose reels or dry landing valves 
shall not be required if the infra-
structure yard hydrants are availa-
ble and cover the commercial out-
let. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
2.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR    
AREA OF THE COMMERCIAL    
OUTLET IS MORE THAN 900 M2   

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided 

throughout the building including 
basements as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  Auxiliary rooms and various areas 
of the building shall be protected 
as per Table 9.30. 

iii. Hose Reel System shall be provid-
ed throughout the building as per 
Section 3.3. 

iv. Dry landing valves shall not be re-

quired. 

v.  Hose reels or dry landing valves 
shall not be required if the infra-
structure yard hydrants are availa-
ble and cover the commercial out-
let. 

A.  VILLAS (G+1)        
 
HAVING         
COMMERCIAL 
OUTLETS           
ATTACHED TO IT 
OR IN THE SAME 
PLOT 
 
B. BUSINESS 
(GROUP A, B, C)      
 
HAVING         
COMMERCIAL 
OUTLETS          
ATTACHED TO IT 
OR IN THE SAME 
PLOT 
 
C. MOSQUES        
 
HAVING         
COMMERCIAL 
OUTLETS          
ATTACHED TO IT 
OR IN THE SAME 
PLOT 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 711 of 1348 

4.5.  Lowrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

 
4.5.6. 

Tents, marquees, site offices, site dwellings shall be provided with Fire protection 
Systems in compliance with Table 9.21.f. and Auxiliary Rooms Fire Protection Sys-
tems as per Table 9.30. 

PREDOMINANT 
OCCUPANCY 

A.  TEMPORARY 
TENTS AND 
MARQUEES 

B.   PARMANENT 

TENTS AND 
MARQUEES 

C.   PARMANENT 
COMMERCIAL 
TENTS AND 
DESERT 
CAMPS 

D.  SITE OFFICES 
      (REQUIRED 

FOR LESS 
THAN 6 
MONTHS) 

E.  SITE OFFICES 
      (REQUIRED 
FOR MORE 
THAN 6 
MONTHS) 

Table 9.21.f.: Lowrise Building Fire Protection Systems 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

i.  Fire Extinguishers as per                       

NA 

Chapter 4. 

i.  Hose Reel System shall be provid-
ed throughout the building as per 
Section 3.3. 

ii.  Dry landing valves shall not be re-

quired. 

ii.   The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be 50 gpm with pressure of 4.5 bar 
available at most remote hose reel out-
let. 

iii.  The water tank shall have capacity of 30 
minutes of operation, complete with low 
water level detection and instantaneous 
refilling arrangement. 

i.  Hose Reel System shall be provid-
ed throughout the building as per 
Section 3.3. 

ii.  Dry landing valves shall not be re-

quired. 

ii.   The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be 50 gpm with pressure of 4.5 bar 
available at most remote hose reel out-
let. 

iii.  The water tank shall have capacity of 30 

minutes of operation, complete with 
low water level detection and instanta-
neous refilling arrangement. 

i.  Fire Extinguishers as per                       
 

Chapter 4. 

i.  Hose Reel System shall be provid-
ed throughout the building as per 
Section 3.3. 

ii.  Dry landing valves shall not be re-

quired. 

ii.   The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be 50 gpm with pressure of 4.5 bar 
available at most remote hose reel out-
let. 

iii.  The water tank shall have capacity of 30 

minutes of operation, complete with 
low water level detection and instanta-
neous refilling arrangement. 

i.  Fire Extinguishers as per                       
 

Chapter 4. 

F.   DETACHED 
G+1 BUILD-
INGS HAVING 
GROUND 
FLOOR BUILT 
UP AREA OF 
UPTO 150 SQ 
M, OF ANY            
OCCUPANCY 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 712 of 1348 

4.6.  Mall Fire Protection Systems 

 
4.6.1.  Malls (Covered, Open and Mixed) shall be provided with Fire protection Systems in 

compliance with Table 9.22. and Auxiliary Rooms Fire Protection Systems as per 
Table 9.30. 

 

Table 9.22.: Mall Fire Protection Systems 

PRE       
DOMINANT       
OCCUPANCY 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

A.  COVERED 

MALL  

1.  IRRESPECTIVE OF AREA OR FLOORS 
 
i. 

Sprinklers shall be provided throughout 
the building including basements and 
podiums (open as well as closed) as per             
Section 3.5. 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

1.   IRRESPECTIVE OF AREA OR FLOORS 
 

x.   Where a fire pump set is com-

bined and serves yard hydrants 
and internal building systems, 
the capacity of the fire pump set 
shall  be 2000 gpm (irrespective 
of number of standpipes) at a 
pressure as required to satisfy 
6.9 bar at the most remote 
landing valve. 

xi.    Where a fire pump set serves 

yard hydrants and internal 
building systems, the combined 
water tank shall have a capacity 
of  60 minutes of operation, 
complete with low water level 
detection and  instantaneous 
refilling arrangement. 

xii.   Where a fire pump set serves 
only internal building systems, 
the capacity of the fire pump set 
shall be 1500 gpm (irrespective 
of number of standpipes) at a 
pressure as required to satisfy 
6.9 bar at the most remote 
landing valve. 

xiii.  Where a fire pump set serves only 
internal building systems, the wa-
ter tank shall have a capacity of 
60 minutes of operation, com-
plete with low  water level detec-
tion, dedicated direct breeching 
inlet and instantaneous refilling 
arrangement. 

xiv.  Multiple breeching inlets shall be 

provided across the mall and 
along the fire access road. 

ii.  Auxiliary rooms and various areas of the 

building shall be protected as per         
Table 9.30. 

iii.  A wet riser System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per                
Section 3.4. 

iv.  Wet risers shall be interconnected at 

v. 

the highest level. 
Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided as 
per Section 3.11. 

vi.  Yard hydrants shall not be required 

where infrastructure yard hydrants are 
available within 120 m of every exterior 
part of the mall. Tapping from existing 
yard hydrant network shall be per-
mitted to extend the yard hydrants to 
comply with coverage requirements. In 
this scenario, requirements of Table 
9.22.1.xii. and xiii shall apply. 

vii.  A minimum of 2 breeching inlets shall 
be provided at two separate locations 
along the fire access road. 

viii.  Every tenant space shall be provided 
with an isolation valve to enable the 
isolation of the tenant areas from rest 
of the Mall , during repairs, renovation 
or maintenance. 

ix.  Supermarket storage areas, Hypermar-

ket storage areas, large clothing storage 
areas and such storage hazards shall be 
provided with ESFR sprinklers as per 
relevant codes of this chapter. 

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 713 of 1348 

4.6.  Mall Fire Protection Systems 

Table 9.22.: Mall Fire Protection Systems 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

PRE       
DOMINANT       
OCCUPAN-
CY 

B. OPEN MALL 
 
THE               
REQUIREMENT 
IS ONLY FOR 
OPEN            
CIRCULATION 
AREA AND 
NOT FOR TEN-
ANT SPACES.      
TENANT     
SPACES SHALL 
COMPLY WITH 
OTHER          
APPLICABLE 
SECTIONS AS 
PER               
OCCUPANCY 
TYPES 
 
COMBINED 
FIRE PUMP SET 
AND FIRE    
WATER TANK 
FOR BOTH 
OPEN MALL   
CIRCULATION 
AREA AND THE 
TENANT   
BUILDING    
INTERNAL FIRE 
PROTECTION 
SYSTEM SHALL 
BE PERMITTED 

1.  IF TOTAL PLOT AREA IS UP TO 900 M2 
 
i.  Hose Reel System, exterior type, shall 

be provided throughout the open circu-
lation area, along the fire access road, 
as per Section 3.3. 

ii.  Dry landing valves and risers shall not 

be required. 

 
 
 
 
2.  IF TOTAL PLOT AREA IS MORE THAN 

900 M2  UPTO 2000 M2 

 
i.  Exterior Wet riser System shall be pro-
vided throughout the open circulation 
area, along the fire access road and 
such that all tenant buildings are within 
30 m of the hose outlet, as per Section 
3.4. 

ii.  Dry landing valves and risers shall not 

be required. 

iii. Minimum of 2 breeching inlets shall be 

provided at two separate locations 
along the fire access road. 

OR 
i.  Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided as 

per Table 9.22.B.3.  

ii.  Wet risers shall not be required. 
iii. Yard hydrants, wet risers or hose reel 
system shall not be required where in-
frastructure yard hydrants are available 
within 120 m of every exterior part of 
the tenant buildings. Tapping from ex-
isting yard hydrant network shall be 
permitted to extend the yard hydrants 
to comply with coverage requirements.  

 
3.  IF PLOT AREA IS MORE THAN 2000 M2   
 
i.  Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided as 

per Section 3.11. 

ii.  Yard hydrants or wet risers shall not be 
required where infrastructure yard hy-
drants are available within 120 m of 
every exterior part of the tenant build-
ings. 

iii. Minimum of 2 breeching inlets shall be 

provided at two separate locations 
along the fire access road. 

iv. Wet risers and dry landing valves shall 

 

not be required. 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

1.  IF TOTAL PLOT AREA IS UP TO 900 M2 
 
iii.  The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be 50 gpm at a pressure as required 
to satisfy 4.5 bar at the most remote 
Hose reel outlet valve.. 

iv.  The water tank shall have capacity of 

30 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection and 
instantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 
2.  IF TOTAL PLOT AREA IS MORE THAN 

900 M2  UPTO 2000 M2 

 

iv.  The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be 750 gpm at a pressure as required 
to satisfy 6.9 bar at the most remote 
landing valve. 

v.  The water tank shall have capacity of 

60 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, dedi-
cated direct breeching inlet  and in-
stantaneous refilling arrangement. 
vi.  Where yard hydrant is considered, 

the capacity of the fire pump set shall 
be 1000 gpm at a pressure as required 
to satisfy 6.9 bar at the most remote 
hydrant outlet. 

vii. The water tank shall have capacity of 

60 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, dedi-
cated direct breeching inlet  and in-
stantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 
 
 
 
3.  IF PLOT AREA IS MORE THAN           

2000 M2   

 
v.  The capacity of the fire pump set shall 
be 1000 gpm at a pressure as required 
to satisfy 6.9 bar at the most remote 
landing valve. 

vi.  The water tank shall have capacity of 

60 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, dedi-
cated direct breeching inlet  and in-
stantaneous refilling arrangement. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 714 of 1348 

4.6.  Mall Fire Protection Systems 

 
 
 

PREDOMI-
NANT       
OCCUPANCY 

C. MIXED MALL 
 
(MERCANTILE 
DEVLEOP-
MENTS WHERE 
COVERED MALL 
AND OPEN 
MALL ARE 
MIXED AND 
INTERMINGLE) 

 

Table 9.22.: Mall Fire Protection Systems 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

1.  IRRESPECTIVE OF AREA OR FLOORS 
 
i. 

Sprinklers shall be provided through-
out the enclosed buildings, retails, 
restaurants and service blocks includ-
ing basements and podiums (open as 
well as closed) as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  Auxiliary rooms and various areas of 

the building shall be protected as per         
Table 9.30. 

iii.  A wet riser System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per                
Section 3.4. 

iv.  Wet risers shall be interconnected at 

v. 

the highest level. 
Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided 
as per Section 3.11. 

vi.  Yard hydrants shall not be required 
where infrastructure yard hydrants 
are available within 120 m of every 
exterior part of the mall. Tapping 
from existing yard hydrant network 
shall be permitted to extend the yard 
hydrants to comply with coverage 
requirements. In this scenario, re-
quirements of Table 9.22.3.xii. and 
xiii shall apply. 

vii.  A minimum of 2 breeching inlets shall 
be provided at two separate locations 
along the fire access road. 

viii.  Every tenant space shall be provided 
with an isolation valve to enable the 
isolation of the tenant areas from rest 
of the Mall , during repairs, renova-
tion or maintenance. 

ix.  Enclosed supermarket storage areas, 

Hypermarket storage areas, large 
clothing storage areas and such en-
closed storage hazards shall be pro-
vided with ESFR sprinklers as per rele-
vant codes of this chapter. 

1.   IRRESPECTIVE OF AREA OR FLOORS 
 
x.   Where a fire pump set is combined 
and serves yard hydrants and inter-
nal building systems, the capacity 
of the fire pump set shall  be 2000 
gpm (irrespective of number of 
standpipes) at a pressure as re-
quired to satisfy 6.9 bar at the 
most remote landing valve. 

xi.     Where a fire pump set serves yard 
hydrants and internal building sys-
tems, the combined water tank 
shall have a capacity of  60 minutes 
of operation, complete with low 
water level detection and  instanta-
neous refilling arrangement. 

xii.    Where a fire pump set serves only 

internal building systems, the ca-
pacity of the fire pump set  shall be 
1500 gpm (irrespective of number 
of standpipes) at a pressure as re-
quired to satisfy 6.9 bar at the 
most remote landing valve. 

xiii.   Where a fire pump set serves only 

internal building systems, the water 
tank shall have a capacity of 60 
minutes of operation, complete with 
low  water level detection, dedicated 
direct breeching inlet and instanta-
neous refilling  arrangement. 

xiv.  Multiple breeching inlets shall be 

provided across the mall and along 
the fire access road. 

 
 
 
 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 715 of 1348 

4.7.  Villa Fire Protection Systems 

 
4.7.1. 

Private and Commercial Villas shall be provided with Fire protection Systems in 
compliance with Table 9.23. and Auxiliary Rooms Fire Protection Systems, if any, 
shall be as per Table 9.30. 

Table 9.23.: Private and Commercial Villa Fire Protection Systems 

OCCUPANCY 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

FIRE PUMP AND FIRE WATER 
TANK CAPACITIES 

A. PRIVATE  VILLA  
 
 

1.  Though it is not mandatory, it is highly 

1.a.  Domestic type and residential 

recommended to consider providing 
automatic sprinklers throughout private 
villas irrespective of built-up area. 

type sprinkler systems, with 
domestic water tank are ac-
ceptable. 

1.b.  Fire Pump and/or Fire water 
tank shall be permitted to be 
installed on the roof, if struc-
ture is capable of accommo-
dating such additional load. 

 
 
2.  IF GROUND FLOOR BUILT-UP 

AREA IS MORE THAN 1500 m2   

 
v.  The capacity of the fire pump 

set shall be 250 gpm at pressure 
as required to satisfy 4.5 bar at 
the most remote Hose reel out-
let valve. 

vi. The water tank shall have capac-

ity of 30 minutes of operation, 
complete with low water level 
detection and instantaneous 
refilling arrangement. 

 
 
 
3.  IF BASEMENT FLOOR BUILT-UP 
AREA IS MORE THAN 1500 m2 

 

v.  The capacity of the fire pump 

set shall be 250 gpm at pressure 
as required to satisfy 4.5 bar at 
the most remote Hose reel out-
let valve. 

vi. The water tank shall have capac-

ity of 30 minutes of operation, 
complete with low water level 
detection and instantaneous 
refilling arrangement. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.  IF GROUND FLOOR BUILT-UP AREA IS 

MORE THAN 1500 m2   

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided throughout 
the building including basements (open 
as well as closed) as per Section 3.5. 
ii.  Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the basement and ground 
floor as per Section 3.3. 

iii. Dry landing valves and risers shall not be 

required. 

iv. For Commercial developments, Fire 

Pump Room and Fire water tank are de-
veloper’s responsibility and shall be pro-
vided at developer’s facility manage-
ment service block or areas. 

 
3.  IF BASEMENT FLOOR BUILT-UP AREA IS 

MORE THAN 1500 m2   

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided throughout 
the basements (open as well as closed) 
as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the basement and ground 
floor as per Section 3.3. 

iii. Dry landing valves and risers shall not be 

required. 

iv. For Commercial developments, Fire 

Pump Room and Fire water tank are de-
veloper’s responsibility and shall be pro-
vided at developer’s facility manage-
ment service block or areas. 

   

 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 716 of 1348 

4.7.  Villa Fire Protection Systems 

 
4.7.1. 

Private and Commercial Villas shall be provided with Fire protection Systems in 
compliance with Table 9.23. and Auxiliary Rooms, if any, Fire Protection Systems as 
per Table 9.30. 

Table 9.23.: Private and Commercial Villa Fire Protection Systems 

OCCUPANCY  SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

FIRE PUMP AND FIRE WATER 
TANK CAPACITIES 

B. COMMERCIAL 

VILLA 

1.  Though it is not mandatory, it is highly 

1.a.  Domestic type and residential type 

recommended to consider providing 
automatic sprinklers throughout the 
villas irrespective of built-up area.  

 
2.  ALL COMMERCIAL VILLA                            

sprinkler systems shall be per-
mitted. 

 
 
2.  ALL COMMERCIAL VILLA                            

DEVELOPMENTS HAVING PLOT AREA 
OF 20,000 m2  OR MORE 

DEVELOPMENTS HAVING PLOT  AR-
EA OF 20,000 m2  OR MORE 

 
i.  Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided as 

 
ii.   The capacity of the fire pump set 

per Section 3.11. 

 
 

3.  IF GROUND FLOOR BUILT-UP AREA OF 
COMMERCIAL VILLA IS MORE THAN     
1500 m2   

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided throughout 
the building including basements (open 
as well as closed) as per Section 3.5. 
ii.  Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the basement and ground 
floor as per Section 3.3. 

iii. Dry landing valves and risers shall not 

be required. 

iv. For Commercial developments, Fire 
Pump Room and Fire water tank are 
developer’s responsibility and shall be 
provided at developer’s facility manage-
ment service block or areas. 

 
4.  IF BASEMENT FLOOR BUILT-UP AREA IS 

MORE THAN 1500 m2   

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided throughout 
the basements (open as well as closed) 
as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the basement and ground 
floor as per Section 3.3. 

iii. Dry landing valves and risers shall not 

be required. 

iv. For Commercial developments, Fire 
Pump Room and Fire water tank are 
developer’s responsibility and shall be 
provided at developer’s facility manage-
ment service block or areas. 

 

 

shall be 1000 gpm at pressure as re-
quired to satisfy 6.9 bar at the most 
remote hydrant outlet valve. 

iii.  The water tank shall have a capacity 

of 60 minutes of operation, com-
plete with low water level detection, 
dedicated direct breeching inlet  and 
instantaneous refilling arrangement. 

3.  IF GROUND FLOOR BUILT-UP  AREA 

OF COMMERCIAL VILLA IS MORE 
THAN 1500 m2   

 
v.  The capacity of the fire pump set 

shall be 250 gpm at pressure as re-
quired to satisfy 4.5 bar at the most 
remote Hose reel outlet valve. 

vi. The water tank shall have capacity of 

30 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection and 
instantaneous refilling arrangement. 
vii. Where infrastructure yard hydrants 
are provided, the required villa sprin-
kler system shall be permitted to be 
fed by the yard hydrant pumpset and 
water. 

 
4.  IF BASEMENT FLOOR BUILT-UP AR-

EA IS MORE THAN 1500 m2 

 

v.  The capacity of the fire pump set 

shall be 250 gpm at pressure as re-
quired to satisfy 4.5 bar at the most 
remote Hose reel outlet valve. 

vi. The water tank shall have capacity of 

30 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection and 
instantaneous refilling arrangement. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 717 of 1348 

4.8.  Parking Facilities Fire Protection Systems 

 
4.8.1. 

Parking facilities shall be provided with fire protection systems in compliance with 
Table 9.24. and Auxiliary Rooms Fire Protection Systems as per Table 9.30. 

Table 9.24.: Parking Facility Fire Protection Systems 

OCCUPANCY  SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

A.  PARKING 
GROUP A , 
ENCLOSED 
PARKING 
STRUCTURE 

 
 

1.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA IS 

UP TO 900 M2  AND  STRUCTURE 
HEIGHT IS UP TO 15 M (LOWRISE) 

 
 
i.  A dry riser + Hose Reel System shall be 

provided throughout the building as 
per Section 3.2. and Section 3.3. 

ii.  Dry risers shall be interconnected at 

the highest level. 

 
 
 
 
 
2.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA IS 
901 M2  TO 3600 M2  AND  STRUCTURE 
HEIGHT IS UP TO 15 M (LOWRISE) 

FIRE PUMP AND FIRE WATER 
TANK CAPACITIES 

1.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA 
IS UP TO 900 M2 AND STRUCTURE 
HEIGHT IS UP TO 15 M (LOWRISE) 

 
iii.  The capacity of the fire pump set 

shall be 50 gpm at a pressure as re-
quired to satisfy 4.5 bar at the most 
remote Hose reel  outlet valve. 

iv.  The water tank shall have a capacity 

of 30 minutes of operation, com-
plete with low water level detection 
and instantaneous refilling arrange-
ment. 

 
2.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA 
IS 901 M2  TO 3600 M2  AND  STRUC-
TURE HEIGHT IS UP TO 15 M 
(LOWRISE) 

 
v.   The capacity of the fire pump set 
shall be 300 gpm at a pressure as 
required to satisfy 4.5 bar at the 
most remote Hose valve. 

vi.  The water tank shall have a capacity 

of 30 minutes of operation, com-
plete with low water level detection 
and instantaneous refilling arrange-
ment. 

 
 
 
3.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA 
IS MORE THAN 3600 M2  OR STRUC-
TURE HEIGHT EXCEEDS 15 M 
(MIDRISE AND ABOVE) 

 
v.   The capacity of the fire pump set 

shall be 750 gpm if there are 2 stand-
pipes, 1000 gpm if there are more 
than 3 standpipes at a pressure as 
required to satisfy 6.9 bar at the 
most remote landing valve. 

vi.  The water tank shall have capacity 

of 60 minutes of operation, com-
plete with low water level detection 
and instantaneous refilling arrange-
ment. 

 

 

 
 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided throughout 

the parking structure as per Section 
3.5. 

ii.  Auxiliary rooms and various areas of 

the building shall be protected as per         
Table 9.30. 

iii. A dry riser + Hose Reel System shall be 

provided throughout the building as 
per Section 3.2. and Section 3.3. 

iv. Dry risers shall be interconnected at 

the highest level. 

 
3.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA IS 
MORE THAN 3600 M2  OR STRUCTURE 
HEIGHT EXCEEDS 15 M (MIDRISE AND 
ABOVE) 

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided throughout 

the Parking structure as per Section 
3.5. 

ii.  Auxiliary rooms and various areas of 
the building shall be protected as per 
Table 9.30. 

iii. A wet riser System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per              
Section 3.4. 

iv. Wet risers shall be interconnected at 

the highest level. 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 718 of 1348 

 

Table 9.24.: Parking Facility Fire Protection Systems 

PREDOMINANT 
OCCUPANCY 

A.  PARKING 

GROUP A ,   
ENCLOSED 
PARKING 
STRUCTURE 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

4. IF PLOT AREA IS MORE THAN      

20,000  m2   

 
i.  Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided 
as per Section 3.11., in a loop to cov-
er the entire development.  

ii.  Yard hydrants shall not be required 
where infrastructure yard hydrants 
are available within 60 m of every 
exterior part of the structure. Tap-
ping from existing yard hydrant net-
work shall be permitted to extend 
the yard hydrants to comply with 
coverage requirements.  

iii. Sprinklers, wet risers and hose reel 

system shall be provided for the 
building in accordance with Table 
9.24.A.1., 2., or 3. as applicable. 

1.  IRRESPECTIVE OF AREA 
 
i.  A deluge water spray system shall be 

provided as per Section 3.8., such 
that each vehicle is under the deluge 
spray coverage. 

ii.  A wet riser system shall be provided 
throughout the building, near stairs 
and on access walkways as per       
Section 3.4. 

iii. Wet risers shall be interconnected at 

the highest level. 

 
 
2.  IF PLOT AREA IS MORE THAN          

20,000  m2   

 
i.  Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided 
as per Section 3.11., in a loop to cov-
er the entire development. The fire 
Hose for interior of the building shall 
be tapped from the hydrant loop. 

ii.  Yard hydrants shall not be required 
where infrastructure yard hydrants 
are available within 60 m of every 
exterior part of the structure. Tap-
ping from existing yard hydrant net-
work shall be permitted to extend 
the yard hydrants to comply with 
coverage requirements.  

B.  PARKING 

GROUP B ,   
MECHANICAL/ 
ROBOTIC 
PARKING 
STRUCTURE 

 
 

 

FIRE PUMP AND FIRE WATER 
TANK CAPACITIES 

4.  IF PLOT AREA IS MORE THAN        

20,000  m2   

 
iii. Where a fire pump set is combined 

and serves yard hydrants and internal 
building systems, the capacity of the 
fire pump set shall be 1000 gpm at a 
pressure as required to satisfy 6.9 bar 
at the most remote hydrant valve and 
the hose outlet. 

iv. Where fire pumpset serves only the 

yard fire hydrants, pump capacity shall 
be 1000 gpm at a pressure as required 
to satisfy 6.9 bar at the most remote 
hydrant valve. 

v. The combined Fire water tank shall 

have capacity of 60 minutes of opera-
tion, complete with low water level 
detection, dedicated direct breeching 
inlet and instantaneous refilling ar-
rangement.  

1.  IRRESPECTIVE OF AREA 
 
iv. The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be sufficient to satisfy minimum of 2 
adjacent deluge water spray system 
zones at a pressure as required to 
satisfy 6.9 bar at the most remote 
Hose reel outlet valve. 

v.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 

60 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection and 
instantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 
2.  IF PLOT AREA IS MORE THAN                

20,000  m2   

 
iii.  Where a fire pump set is combined 

and serves yard hydrants and internal 
building systems, the capacity of the 
fire pump set shall be 1000 gpm at a 
pressure as required to satisfy 6.9 bar 
at the most remote landing valve and 
the hydrant outlet. 

iv. Where fire pumpset serves only the 

yard fire hydrants, pump capacity shall 
be 1000 gpm at a pressure as required 
to satisfy 6.9 bar at the most remote 
hydrant outlet. 

v. The combined Fire water tank shall 

have capacity of 60 minutes of opera-
tion, complete with low water level 
detection, dedicated direct breeching 
inlet and instantaneous refilling ar-
rangement  

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 719 of 1348Table 9.24.: Parking Facility Fire Protection Systems 

 

 
OCCUPAN-
CY 

C.  PARKING 
GROUP C  
OPEN 
PARKING 
STRUCTURE 

 
i.  Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provid-
ed as per Section 3.11., in a loop 
to cover the entire development.  

ii.  Yard hydrants shall not be re-

quired where infrastructure yard 
hydrants are available within 60 m 
of every exterior part of the struc-
ture. Tapping from existing yard 
hydrant network shall be per-
mitted to extend the yard hydrants 
to comply with coverage require-
ments. 

iii. Sprinklers, wet risers or hose reel 

system shall be in accordance with 
Table 9.24.C.1., 2., or 3., as appli-
cable. 

 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

1.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AR-
EA IS UP TO 2000 m2 AND BUILD-
ING HEIGHT IS LESS THAN 15 M 

 
i.  Hose Reel System shall be provid-
ed throughout the building as per 
Section 3.3. 

ii.  Dry risers shall not be required. 
 
 
 
 
2. IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA 

IS UP TO 2000 m2  AND STRUC-
TURE HEIGHT IS 15 M—UP TO 
LESS THAN 23 M 

 
i.  A wet riser System shall be provid-
ed throughout the building as per 
Section 3.4. 

ii.  Wet risers shall be interconnected 

at the highest level. 

 
 
 
 
 
3. IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA 
IS MORE THAN 2000 m2 OR BUILD-
ING HEIGHT IS 23 m AND ABOVE 

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided 

throughout the Parking structure 
as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  A wet riser system shall be provid-
ed throughout the building as per 
Section 3.4. 

iii. Wet risers shall be interconnected 

at the highest level. 

 
4.  IF PLOT AREA IS MORE THAN 

20,000  m2   

FIRE PUMP AND FIRE WATER TANK    
CAPACITIES 

1.  IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA IS UP TO 
2000 m2 AND BUILDING HEIGHT IS LESS THAN 
15 M 

 
iii.   The capacity of the fire pump set shall be 50 

gpm at a pressure as required to satisfy 4.5 
bar at the most remote Hose reel outlet valve. 

iv.  The water tank shall have capacity of 45 

minutes of operation, complete with low wa-
ter level detection and instantaneous refilling 
arrangement. 

 
2. IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA IS UP TO 
2000 m2  AND STRUCTURE HEIGHT IS 15 M—
UP TO LESS THAN 23 M 

 
iii.   The capacity of the fire pump set shall be 750 

gpm if there are 2 stairs, 1000 gpm if there 
are 3 stairs and 1000 gpm if there are more 
than 3 stairs at pressure as required to satisfy 
6.9 bar at the most remote landing valve. 

iv.  The water tank shall have capacity of 60 

minutes of operation, complete with low wa-
ter level detection, dedicated direct breech-
ing inlet  and instantaneous refilling arrange-
ment. 

 
3. IF BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA IS MORE 
THAN 2000 m2 OR BUILDING HEIGHT IS 23 m 
AND ABOVE 

 
iv.   The capacity of the fire pump set shall be 

1000 gpm at a pressure as required to satisfy 
6.9 bar at the most remote Landing Valve. 
v.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 60 

minutes of operation, complete with low wa-
ter level detection, dedicated direct breeching 
inlet and instantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 
4.  IF PLOT AREA IS MORE THAN 20,000  m2 
 
iv. Where a fire pump set is combined and serves 

yard hydrants and internal building systems, 
the capacity of the fire pump set shall be 1000 
gpm at a pressure as required to satisfy 6.9 
bar at the most remote Landing Valve and 
yard hydrant. 

v. Where fire pumpset serves only the yard fire 

hydrants, pump capacity shall be 1000 gpm at 
a pressure as required to satisfy 6.9 bar at the 
most remote hydrant valve. 

vi.  Combined Fire water tank shall have capacity 
of 60 minutes of operation, complete with low 
water level detection, dedicated direct 
breeching inlet and instantaneous refilling 
arrangement  

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 720 of 1348Table 9.24.: Parking Facility Fire Protection Systems 

FIRE PUMP AND FIRE WATER TANK CA-
PACITIES 

1.  IF COVERED/SHADED  PARKING AREA IS    

3600 m2  TO LESS THAN 20,000  m2   

 
iii. The capacity of the fire pump set shall be 50 
gpm at a pressure as required to satisfy 4.5 
bar at the most remote Hose reel outlet valve. 

iv. The water tank shall have capacity of 60 

minutes of operation, complete with low wa-
ter level detection and instantaneous refilling 
arrangement. 

 
 
2. 

IF COVERED/SHADED  PARKING AREA IS 
MORE THAN 20,000  m2   

 
iii. The fire pump set capacity shall be 1000 gpm. 
iv.  Fire water tank shall have capacity of 60 

minutes of operation, complete with low wa-
ter level detection, dedicated direct breeching 
inlet and instantaneous refilling arrangement  

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

1.  IF COVERED/SHADED  PARKING 
AREA IS 3600 m2   TO LESS THAN 
20,000  m2   

 
i.  Hose Reel System shall be pro-

vided throughout the building as 
per Section 3.3. 

ii.  Dry riser shall not be required. 
 
 
 
 
 
2.  IF COVERED/SHADED  PARKING 
AREA IS MORE THAN 20,000  m2   

 
i.  Yard Fire Hydrants shall be pro-
vided as per Section 3.11., in a 
loop to cover the entire develop-
ment. Where yard hydrants are 
provided, hose reel system shall 
not be required. 

ii.  Yard hydrants or hose reel sys-

tem shall not be required where 
infrastructure yard hydrants are 
available within 60 m of every 
exterior part of the structure. 

 

OCCUPAN-
CY 

D.  PARKING 
GROUP C  
COVERED /
SHADED 
PARKING 

 
HAVING ONE 
LEVEL ONLY 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 721 of 1348 

4.9.  Motor Fuel Dispensing Facility Fire Protection Systems 

 
4.9.1.  Motor fuel dispensing Facilities shall be provided with Fire protection Systems in 
compliance with Table 9.25. and Auxiliary Rooms Fire Protection Systems as per 
Table 9.30. 

 

Table 9.25.: Motor Fuel Dispensing Facility Fire Protection Systems 

PREDOMINANT                
OCCUPANCY 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS  FIRE PUMP SET AND FIRE 
WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

i.  Sprinklers shall be provided 
throughout the mini marts, 
restaurants, dining areas, 
business, retail, service Sta-
tions as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  A Hose Reel System shall be 

provided throughout the 
building as per Section 3.3. 

iii. Dry landing valves and ris-
ers shall not be required. 

A. GROUP A  

PETROL/GAS STATIONS HAVING           

UNDERGROUND FUEL STORAGE 

TANKS  

WITH MINI MARTS,                 

RESTAURANTS,  DINING,  FOOD 

COURTS, RETAIL,  BUSINESS 

AND SERVICE/REPAIR            

STATIONS AS INDIVIDUAL 

BUILDINGS 

 
 
 

iv.  The capacity of the fire pump set 
shall be 300 gpm at a pressure as 
required to satisfy 4.5 bar at the 
most remote Hose reel  outlet 
valve.. 

v.  The water tank shall have a ca-
pacity of 60 minutes of opera-
tion, complete with low water 
level detection, dedicated direct 
breeching inlet and instantane-
ous refilling arrangement. 

iii.   The capacity of the fire pump 

set shall be 50 gpm at pressure 
as required to satisfy 6.9 bar at 
the most remote hydrant outlet 
valve. 

iv.  The water tank shall have capaci-

ty of 60 minutes of operation, 
complete with low water level 
detection and instantaneous 
refilling arrangement. 

i.  A hose reel system shall be 

provided throughout the 
building as per Section 3.3. 

ii.  Dry landing valves and ris-
ers shall not be required. 

 
 

B. GROUP B  
 
PETROL/GAS STATIONS HAVING           
UNDERGROUND FUEL STORAGE 
TANKS  
 
WITH RESTAURANTS/BAKERIES, 
WITHIN A SINGLE MINI MART 
BUILDING AND SERVICE/REPAIR 
STATIONS 
 
FLEET VEHICLE  FUEL               
DISPENSING, 
 
MARINE MOTOR FUEL            
DISPENSING 

ii. NA. 

i.  Extinguishers shall be pro-
vided as per Chapter 4. Ta-
ble 4.3.2.8. 

C. GROUP C 
 
PETROL/GAS STATIONS HAVING           
UNDERGROUND FUEL STORAGE 
TANKS  
 
WITH MINI MARTS ONLY WITH-
OUT SERVICE/REPAIR STATIONS 
 
ELECTRIC CHARGING UNITS 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 722 of 1348 

4.10.  Infrastructure Fire Protection Systems 

 
4.10.1.  All new developments' infrastructure, marina developments, waterfront develop-

ments, theme parks, amusement parks and commercial developments shall be 
provided with Fire protection Systems in compliance with Table 9.26. and auxiliary 
rooms fire Protection Systems, if any, as per Table 9.30. 

 

Table 9.26.: Infrastructure Fire Protection Systems 

PREDOMINANT 
OCCUPANCY 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

FIRE PUMP SET AND FIRE  
WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

A.  INFRASTRUCTURE  
 
 

i.  Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided 

vi.   The capacity of the stand-alone 

as per Section 3.11. 

ii.  A combined network with irrigation 
network is not acceptable. The yard 
hydrant network shall be dedicated 
with dedicated fire pump and fire 
water tank. 

iii. A fire pump room and Fire water tank 
shall be provided in service blocks or 
suitable facility management block 
areas. 

iv. A dedicated corridor/Trench shall be 
provided for the Hydrant piping net-
work complete with strategic accessi-
ble manholes. 

v.  Yard hydrants shall be provided along 

the fire access road at interval as 
mentioned in Table 3.13. 

dedicated fire pump set, serving 
only the yard hydrant system 
shall be 1000 gpm at pressure 
as required to satisfy 6.9 bar at 
the most remote hydrant outlet 
valve. 

 
vii.  The water tank shall have a ca-
pacity of 90 minutes of opera-
tion, complete with low water 
level detection, dedicated direct 
breeching inlet and instantane-
ous refilling arrangement. 

 
viii.  TSE (Treated Sewage Water), 
tested as acceptable for fire 
protection purpose shall be ac-
ceptable upon submission of 
test reports to Civil Defence. 

 
ix.    Sweet water of lakes and ponds  

shall be acceptable, provided 
that an adequate water level 
reserve is ensured at all times. 

B.  MARINA AND   
WATERFRONT   
INFRASTRUCTURE 

i.  Marinas and waterfront property  
infrastructure and associated facili-
ties shall be provided with Fire Pro-
tection systems in accordance with 
Chapter 21, Table 21.4. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 723 of 1348 

4.11.  Storage, Warehouse and Industrial Facility Fire Protection Systems 

 

4.11.1.  Storage, warehouse and industrial facilities shall be provided with Fire protection Systems in com-

pliance with Table 9.27. and auxiliary rooms fire protection systems as per Table 9.30. However, all 
warehouse and industrial sprinkler protection designers shall first consider and consult the rele-
vant Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) before designing and proposing the sprinkler system. 

Table 9.27.: Storage, Warehouse and Industrial Fire Protection Systems 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

1.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR       
AREA IS LESS THAN 900 m2  AND EACH 
INDIVIDUAL UNIT COMPARTMENT AREA 
IS LESS THAN 230 m2 

1.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR         

AREA IS LESS THAN 900 m2  AND EACH 
INDIVIDUAL UNIT COMPARTMENT AR-
EA IS LESS THAN 230 m2 

PREDOMI-
NANT        
OCCUPANCY 

A. MULTI     
TENANT 
WAREHOUSE 
AND        
FACTORIES 
FOR RENTAL 
PURPOSE  

 
     (LIMITED TO 

 
i.  Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 
3.3. 

ii.  Hose Reel System shall be extended to 

mezzanine levels, if any. 

iii. Dry landing valves and risers shall not be 

required. 

 

i.  Sprinklers shall be provided throughout 

AREA IS MORE THAN 900 m2  OR ANY 
INDIVIDUAL UNIT COMPARTMENT AREA 
IS 230 m2 –UP TO 900 m2 

LIGHT     
 
2.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR        
HAZARD             
MATERIALS 
AS PER    
SECTION 
1.1.23,     
TABLE 9.1 
AND LIGHT 
HAZARD  
ACTIVITY AS 
PER SECTION 
1.1.24,     
TABLE 9.2.) 

gpm with area of sprinkler operation of 
1500 ft2 (140 m2). 

throughout the building as per Section 
3.3. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be 0.15 

iv. Dry landing valves and risers shall not be 

iii. Hose Reel System shall be provided 

the facility as per  Section 3.5. 

required. 

 

 
iv.  The capacity of the fire pump set shall 
be 50 gpm at a pressure as required to 
satisfy 4.5 bar at the most remote Hose 
reel outlet valve. 

v.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 
30 minutes of operation, complete with 
low water level detection and instanta-
neous refilling arrangement. 

 
2.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR        

AREA IS MORE THAN 900 m2  OR ANY 
INDIVIDUAL UNIT COMPARTMENT AR-
EA IS 230 m2 –UP TO 900 m2 

 
v. The capacity of the fire pump set shall be 
250 gpm at pressure as required to satis-
fy 4.5 bar at the most remote Hose reel 
outlet valve. 

vi.  The water tank shall have capacity of 45 
minutes of operation, complete with low 
water level detection and instantaneous 
refilling arrangement. 

 
3.  IF INDIVIDUAL COMPARTMENT OR 
UNIT AREA IS MORE THAN 900 m2  

 
iv. The capacity of the fire pump set shall be 

250 gpm at a pressure as required to 
satisfy 4.5 bar at the most remote hose 
reel valve. 

v.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 
60 minutes of operation, complete with 
low water level detection, dedicated di-
rect breeching inlet  and instantaneous 
refilling arrangement. 

 
4.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR BUILT-

UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 m2   

 
vi.   The capacity of the fire pump set shall 
be 750 gpm at a pressure as required to 
satisfy 6.9 bar at the most remote Hy-
drant valve. 

vii. The water tank shall have capacity of 60 
minutes of operation, complete with low 
water level detection, dedicated direct 
breeching inlet and instantaneous refill-
ing arrangement. 

 
 

 

3.  IF INDIVIDUAL COMPARTMENT OR UNIT 

AREA IS MORE THAN 900 m2  

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided throughout 

the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be 0.15 

gpm with area of sprinkler operation of 
1500 ft2 (140 m2). 

iii. Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 
3.3. 

 
4.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR BUILT-

UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 m2   

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided throughout 

the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  Sprinkler design density shall be 0.15 gpm 

with area of sprinkler operation of 1500 
ft2 (140 m2). 

iii. Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided as 
per Section 3.11., in a loop to cover the 
entire facility.  

iv. Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 
3.3. 

v.  Wet risers and internal landing valves 

shall not be required. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 724 of 1348 

Table 9.27.: Storage, Warehouse and Industrial Fire Protection Systems 

 

PREDOMI-
NANT        
OCCUPANCY 

B.  MULTI     

TENANT     
INDUSTRIES, 
AND        
FACTORIES  

 
(ORDINARY 
HAZARD, 
GROUP 1     
CATEGORY   
ACTIVITIES      
AS PER               
DEFINITION  
1.1.13.2.h.) 
 
 

 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

1.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR       
AREA IS LESS THAN 900 m2  AND EACH 
INDIVIDUAL UNIT COMPARTMENT 
AREA IS LESS THAN 230 m2 

1.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR         

AREA IS LESS THAN 900 m2  AND EACH 
INDIVIDUAL UNIT COMPARTMENT 
AREA IS LESS THAN 230 m2 

 
i.  Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 
3.3. 

ii.  Hose Reel System shall be extended to 

mezzanine levels, if any. 

iii. Dry landing valves and risers shall not 

be required. 

 
iv.   The capacity of the fire pump set shall 
be 50 gpm at a pressure as required to 
satisfy 4.5 bar at the most remote Hose 
reel outlet valve. 

v.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 

30 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection and in-
stantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 
 
 
2.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR        
2.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR        

AREA IS MORE THAN 900 m2  OR ANY 
INDIVIDUAL UNIT COMPARTMENT 
AREA IS 230 m2 –UP TO 900 m2 

i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per  Section 3.5. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be 

0.15 gpm with area of sprinkler opera-
tion of 1500 ft2 (140 m2). 

iii. Hose Reel System shall be provided 
throughout the building as per and 
Section 3.3. 

iv. Dry landing valves and risers shall not 

be required. 

 

 
 

3.  IF INDIVIDUAL COMPARTMENT OR 
UNIT AREA IS MORE THAN 900 m2  

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be 

0.15 gpm with area of sprinkler opera-
tion of 1500 ft2 (140 m2). 

iii. Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 
3.3. 

iv. Dry landing valves and risers shall not 

be required. 

 
 
4.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR BUILT

-UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 m2   

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  Sprinkler design density shall be 0.15 
gpm with area of sprinkler operation 
of 1500 ft2 (140 m2). 

iii. Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided as 

per Section 3.11., in a loop to cover 
the entire facility.  

iv. Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 
3.3. 

v.  Wet risers and internal landing valves 

shall not be required. 

AREA IS MORE THAN 900 m2  OR ANY 
INDIVIDUAL UNIT COMPARTMENT 
AREA IS 230 m2 –UP TO 900 m2 

 
v.   The capacity of the fire pump set shall 
be 300 gpm at pressure as required to 
satisfy 4.5 bar at the most remote Hose 
reel outlet valve. 

vi.  The water tank shall have capacity of 

45 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection and in-
stantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 
 
 
 
3.  IF INDIVIDUAL COMPARTMENT OR 
UNIT AREA IS MORE THAN 900 m2  

 
v.   The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be 300 gpm at a pressure as required 
to satisfy 4.5 bar at the most remote 
hose reel valve. 

vi.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 

60 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, dedi-
cated direct breeching inlet  and in-
stantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 
 
 
4.  4.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR 

BUILT-UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 
m2   

 
vi. The capacity of the fire pump set shall 
be 750 gpm at a pressure as required 
to satisfy 6.9 bar at the most remote 
Hydrant valve. 

vii. The water tank shall have capacity of 

60 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, dedi-
cated direct breeching inlet and instan-
taneous refilling arrangement. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 725 of 1348 

 

Table 9.27.: Storage, Warehouse and Industrial Fire Protection Systems 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

1.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR       
AREA IS LESS THAN 900 m2  AND EACH 
INDIVIDUAL UNIT COMPARTMENT 
AREA IS LESS THAN 230 m2 

1.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR         

AREA IS LESS THAN 900 m2  AND EACH 
INDIVIDUAL UNIT COMPARTMENT 
AREA IS LESS THAN 230 m2 

 
i.  Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 
3.3. 

ii.  Hose Reel System shall be extended to 

mezzanine levels, if any. 

iii. Dry landing valves and risers shall not 

be required. 

 
iv.   The capacity of the fire pump set shall 
be 50 gpm at a pressure as required to 
satisfy 4.5 bar at the most remote Hose 
reel outlet valve. 

v.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 

30 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection and in-
stantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 
 
 
2.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR        
2.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR        

AREA IS MORE THAN 900 m2  OR ANY 
INDIVIDUAL UNIT COMPARTMENT 
AREA IS 230 m2 –UP TO 900 m2 

 

 

i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per  Section 3.5. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be 

0.20 gpm with area of sprinkler opera-
tion of 1500 ft2 (140 m2). 

iii. Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 
3.3. No dry landing valves required. 

3.  IF INDIVIDUAL COMPARTMENT OR 
UNIT AREA IS MORE THAN 900 m2  

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be 

0.20 gpm with area of sprinkler opera-
tion of 1500 ft2 (140 m2). 

iii. Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 
3.3. No dry landing valves required. 

 
 
4.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR BUILT

-UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 m2   

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  Sprinkler design density shall be 0.20 
gpm with area of sprinkler operation 
of 1500 ft2 (140 m2). 

iii. Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided as 

per Section 3.11., in a loop to cover 
the entire facility.  

iv. Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 
3.3.  

v.  Wet risers and internal landing valves 

shall not be required. 

AREA IS MORE THAN 900 m2  OR ANY 
INDIVIDUAL UNIT COMPARTMENT 
AREA IS 230 m2 –UP TO 900 m2 

 
iv.   The capacity of the fire pump set shall 
be 350 gpm at pressure as required to 
satisfy 4.5 bar at the most remote Hose 
reel outlet valve. 

v.  The water tank shall have capacity of 

45 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection and in-
stantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 
3.  IF INDIVIDUAL COMPARTMENT OR 
UNIT AREA IS MORE THAN 900 m2  

 
iv.   The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be 350 gpm at a pressure as required 
to satisfy 4.5 bar at the most remote 
hose reel valve. 

v.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 

60 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, dedi-
cated direct breeching inlet  and in-
stantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 
4.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR BUILT-

UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 m2   

 
vi.   The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be 750 gpm at a pressure as required 
to satisfy 6.9 bar at the most remote 
Hydrant valve. 

vii. The water tank shall have capacity of 

60 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, dedi-
cated direct breeching inlet and instan-
taneous refilling arrangement. 

PREDOMI-
NANT        
OCCUPANCY 

C.  MULTI     

TENANT     
INDUSTRIES, 
AND        
FACTORIES  

 
(ORDINARY 
HAZARD, 
GROUP 2     
CATEGORY   
ACTIVITIES      
AS PER               
DEFINITION  
1.1.13.3.c.) 
 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 726 of 1348 

Table 9.27.: Storage, Warehouse and Industrial Fire Protection Systems 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

1.  IF TOTAL GROUND FLOOR BUILT-UP 

AREA IS LESS THAN 3600 m2  

 

i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be 

0.30 gpm with area of sprinkler opera-
tion of 2500 ft2 (232 m2). 

iii. Hose Reel System shall be provided 
throughout the building as per        
Section 3.3. 

iv. Dry landing valves and risers shall not 

be required. 

 
 
2.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR BUILT

-UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 m2   

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  Sprinkler design density shall be 0.30 
gpm with area of sprinkler operation 
of 2500 ft2 (232 m2). 

iii. Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided as 

per Section 3.11., in a loop to cover 
the entire facility.  

iv. Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 
3.3.  

v.  Wet risers and internal landing valves 

shall not be required. 

1.  IF TOTAL GROUND FLOOR BUILT-UP 

AREA IS LESS THAN 3600 m2  

 
v. The capacity of the fire pump set shall 
be 750 gpm at pressure as required to 
satisfy 4.5 bar at the most remote Hose 
reel outlet valve. 

vi.  The water tank shall have capacity of 

60 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection and in-
stantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 
 
 
 
2.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR BUILT-

UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 m2   

 
vi.  The capacity of the fire pump set shall 
be 1250 gpm at a pressure as required 
to satisfy 6.9 bar at the most remote 
Hydrant valve. 

vii. The water tank shall have capacity of 

90 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, dedi-
cated direct breeching inlet and instan-
taneous refilling arrangement. 

PREDOMI-
NANT        
OCCUPANCY 

D.  MULTI     
TENANT     
INDUSTRIES, 
AND        
FACTORIES  

 
(EXTRA        
HAZARD, 
GROUP 1     
CATEGORY   
ACTIVITIES      
AS PER               
DEFINITION  
1.1.13.4.a.) 
 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 727 of 1348 

Table 9.27.: Storage, Warehouse and Industrial Fire Protection Systems 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

1.  IF TOTAL GROUND FLOOR BUILT-UP 

AREA IS LESS THAN 3600 m2  

 

i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be 

0.40 gpm with area of sprinkler opera-
tion of 2500 ft2 (232 m2). 

iii. Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 
3.3. 

iv. Dry landing valves and risers shall not 

be required. 

 

 
2.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR BUILT

-UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 m2   

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  Sprinkler design density shall be 0.40 
gpm with area of sprinkler operation 
of 2500 ft2 (232 m2). 

iii. Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided as 

per Section 3.11., in a loop to cover 
the entire facility.  

iv. Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 
3.3.  

v.  Wet risers and internal landing valves 

shall not be required. 

1.  IF TOTAL GROUND FLOOR BUILT-UP 

AREA IS LESS THAN 3600 m2  

 
v.   The capacity of the fire pump set shall 
be 1000 gpm at pressure as required to 
satisfy 4.5 bar at the most remote Hose 
reel outlet valve. 

vi.  The water tank shall have capacity of 

60 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection and in-
stantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 
 
 
 
4.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR BUILT-

UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 m2   

 
vi.   The capacity of the fire pump set shall 
be 1500 gpm at a pressure as required 
to satisfy 6.9 bar at the most remote 
Hydrant valve. 

vii.  The water tank shall have capacity of 
120 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, dedi-
cated direct breeching inlet and in-
stantaneous refilling arrangement. 

PREDOMI-
NANT        
OCCUPANCY 

E.  MULTI     

TENANT     
INDUSTRIES, 
AND        
FACTORIES  

 
(EXTRA        
HAZARD, 
GROUP 2     
CATEGORY   
ACTIVITIES      
AS PER               
DEFINITION  
1.1.13.5.a.) 
 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 728 of 1348 

Table 9.27.: Storage, Warehouse and Industrial Fire Protection Systems 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

1.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR          

1.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR           

AREA IS LESS THAN 900 m2   

AREA IS LESS THAN 900 m2   

 
i.  Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 
3.3. 

ii.  Dry landing valves and risers shall not 

be required. 

 
iii. The capacity of the fire pump set shall 
be 50 gpm at a pressure as required to 
satisfy 4.5 bar at the most remote 
Hose reel outlet valve. 

iv. The water tank shall have a capacity of 

AREA IS 900 m2—3600 m2 

45 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection and 
instantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 
LIGHT     
 
HAZARD             
 
MATERIALS 
 
 
2.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR           
AS PER    
2.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR           
SECTION 
1.1.23,     
TABLE 9.1 
AND LIGHT 
HAZARD  
ACTIVITY AS 
PER SECTION 
1.1.24,     
TABLE 9.2.) 

 
iv. The capacity of the fire pump set shall 
be 250 gpm at a pressure as required 
to satisfy 4.5 bar at the most remote 
Hose reel outlet valve. 

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

throughout the building as per Section 
3.3. No dry landing valves required. 

0.15 gpm with area of sprinkler opera-
tion of 1500 ft2 (140 m2). 

v.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 

iii. Hose Reel System shall be provided 

out the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be 

AREA IS 900 m2—3600 m2 

60 minutes of operation, dedicated 
direct breeching inlet complete with 
low water level detection, dedicated 
direct breeching inlet and instantane-
ous refilling arrangement. 

 
 
 
 
3.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR BUILT-

UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 m2   

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  Sprinkler design density shall be 0.15 
gpm with an area of sprinkler opera-
tion of 1500 ft2 (140 m2). 

iii. Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided as 

per Section 3.11., in a loop to cover 
the entire facility.  

iv. Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 
3.3. 

v.  Wet risers and internal landing valves 

shall not be required. 

 
 
3.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR BUILT

-UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 m2   

 
vi.  The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be 750 gpm at a pressure as required 
to satisfy 6.9 bar at the most remote 
landing valve. 

vii. The water tank shall have a capacity 
of 60 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, dedi-
cated direct breeching inlet and in-
stantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 
 

PREDOMI-
NANT        
OCCUPANCY 

F.  SINGLE    
TENANT 
WAREHOUSE 
AND        
FACTORIES  

 
      (LIMITED TO 

 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 729 of 1348 

Table 9.27.: Storage, Warehouse and Industrial Fire Protection Systems 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

1.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR          

1.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR           

AREA IS LESS THAN 900 m2   

 
i.  Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 
3.3. 

ii.  Dry landing valves and risers shall not 

AREA IS LESS THAN 900 m2   

 
iii.   The capacity of the fire pump set 
shall be 50 gpm at a pressure as re-
quired to satisfy 4.5 bar at the most 
remote Hose reel outlet valve. 

be required. 

 
 
 
 
 
2.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR           
2.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR           

iv.  The water tank shall have a capacity 
of 45 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection and 
instantaneous refilling arrangement. 

AREA IS 900 m2—3600 m2 

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be 

0.15 gpm with area of sprinkler opera-
tion of 1500 ft2 (140 m2). 

iii. Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 
3.3. 

 
 
 
3.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR BUILT-

UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 m2   

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  Sprinkler design density shall be 0.15 
gpm with an area of sprinkler opera-
tion of 1500 ft2 (140 m2). 

iii. Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided as 

per Section 3.11., in a loop to cover 
the entire facility.  

iv. Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 
3.3. 

v.  Wet risers and internal landing valves 

shall not be required. 

AREA IS 900 m2—3600 m2 

 
iv.   The capacity of the fire pump set 

shall be 300 gpm at a pressure as re-
quired to satisfy 4.5 bar at the most 
remote Hose reel outlet valve. 

v.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 

60 minutes of operation, dedicated 
direct breeching inlet complete with 
low water level detection, dedicated 
direct breeching inlet and instantane-
ous refilling arrangement. 

 
3.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR BUILT

-UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 m2   

 
vi.  The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be 750 gpm at a pressure as required 
to satisfy 6.9 bar at the most remote 
landing valve. 

vii. The water tank shall have a capacity 
of 60 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, dedi-
cated direct breeching inlet and in-
stantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 
 

PREDOMI-
NANT        
OCCUPANCY 

G.  SINGLE    
TENANT     
INDUSTRIES, 
AND        
FACTORIES  

 
(ORDINARY 
HAZARD, 
GROUP 1     
CATEGORY   
ACTIVITIES      
AS PER               
DEFINITION  
1.1.13.2.h.) 
 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 730 of 1348 

Table 9.27.: Storage, Warehouse and Industrial Fire Protection Systems 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

1.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR          

1.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR           

AREA IS LESS THAN 900 m2   

 
i.  Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 
3.3. 

ii.  Dry landing valves and risers shall not 

be required. 

AREA IS LESS THAN 900 m2   

 
iii.  The capacity of the fire pump set shall 
be 50 gpm at a pressure as required to 
satisfy 4.5 bar at the most remote 
Hose reel outlet valve. 

iv. The water tank shall have a capacity of 

 
 
 
 
 
2.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR           
2.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR           

45 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection and 
instantaneous refilling arrangement. 

AREA IS 900 m2—3600 m2 

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be 

0.20 gpm with area of sprinkler opera-
tion of 1500 ft2 (140 m2). 

iii. Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 
3.3. Dry landing valves shall not be re-
quired. 

 
 
 
3.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR BUILT-

UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 m2   

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  Sprinkler design density shall be 0.20 
gpm with an area of sprinkler opera-
tion of 1500 ft2 (140 m2). 

iii. Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided as 

per Section 3.11., in a loop to cover 
the entire facility.  

iv. Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 
3.3. 

v.  Wet risers and internal landing valves 

shall not be required. 

AREA IS 900 m2—3600 m2 

 
iv.  The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be 350 gpm at a pressure as required 
to satisfy 4.5 bar at the most remote 
Hose reel  outlet valve. 

v.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 

60 minutes of operation, dedicated 
direct breeching inlet complete with 
low water level detection, dedicated 
direct breeching inlet and instantane-
ous refilling arrangement. 

 
3.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR BUILT

-UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 m2   

 
vi.   The capacity of the fire pump set 

shall be 750 gpm at a pressure as re-
quired to satisfy 6.9 bar at the most 
remote landing valve. 

vii.  The water tank shall have a capacity 
of 60 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, dedi-
cated direct breeching inlet and in-
stantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 
 

PREDOMI-
NANT        
OCCUPANCY 

H.  SINGLE    
TENANT     
INDUSTRIES, 
AND        
FACTORIES  

 
(ORDINARY 
HAZARD, 
GROUP 2     
CATEGORY   
ACTIVITIES      
AS PER               
DEFINITION  
1.1.13.3.c.) 
 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 731 of 1348 

Table 9.27.: Storage, Warehouse and Industrial Fire Protection Systems 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

1.  IF TOTAL GROUND FLOOR BUILT-UP 

AREA IS LESS THAN 3600 m2  

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be 

0.30 gpm with area of sprinkler opera-
tion of 2500 ft2 (232 m2). 

iii. Where activity and material MSDS de-

mands foam sprinkler system, Foam 
Sprinklers shall be provided through-
out the facility as per Section 3.9. 

iv. Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 
3.3. Dry landing valves shall not be re-
quired. 

 
 
2.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR BUILT-

UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 m2   

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  Sprinkler design density shall be 0.30 
gpm with an area of sprinkler opera-
tion of 2500 ft2 (232 m2). 

iii. Where activity and material MSDS de-

mands foam sprinkler system, Foam 
Sprinklers shall be provided through-
out the facility as per Section 3.9. 

1.  IF TOTAL GROUND FLOOR BUILT-UP 

AREA IS LESS THAN 3600 m2  

 
v. The capacity of the fire pump set shall 
be 750 gpm at pressure as required to 
satisfy 4.5 bar at the most remote 
Hose reel outlet valve. 

vi.  The water tank shall have capacity of 

60 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection and 
instantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR BUILT

-UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 m2   

 
vii. The capacity of the fire pump set shall 
be 1250 gpm at a pressure as required 
to satisfy 6.9 bar at the most remote 
landing valve. 

viii. The water tank shall have a capacity 
of 90 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, dedi-
cated direct breeching inlet and in-
stantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 
 

PREDOMI-
NANT        
OCCUPANCY 

I.  SINGLE    

TENANT     
INDUSTRIES, 
AND        
FACTORIES  

 
(EXTRA        
HAZARD, 
GROUP 1     
CATEGORY   
ACTIVITIES      
AS PER               
DEFINITION  
1.1.13.4.a.) 
 
 

iv. Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided as 

per Section 3.11., in a loop to cover 
the entire facility.  

v.  Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 
3.3. 

vi. A dry riser and wet riser System shall 

not be required. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 732 of 1348PREDOMI-
NANT        
OCCUPANCY 

J.  SINGLE    

TENANT     
INDUSTRIES, 
AND        
FACTORIES  

 
(EXTRA        
HAZARD, 
GROUP 2     
CATEGORY   
ACTIVITIES      
AS PER               
DEFINITION  
1.1.13.5.a.) 
 
 

AREA IS LESS THAN 3600 m2 

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be 

0.40 gpm with area of sprinkler opera-
tion of 2500 ft2 (232 m2). 

iii. Where activity and material MSDS de-

mands foam sprinkler system, Foam 
Sprinklers shall be provided through-
out the facility as per Section 3.9. 

iv. Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 
3.3. Dry landing valves shall not be re-
quired. 

 
 
3.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR BUILT-

UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 m2   

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  Sprinkler design density shall be 0.40 
gpm with an area of sprinkler opera-
tion of 2500 ft2 (232 m2). 

iii. Where activity and material MSDS de-

mands foam sprinkler system, Foam 
Sprinklers shall be provided through-
out the facility as per Section 3.9. 

AREA IS LESS THAN 3600 m2 

 
v. The capacity of the fire pump set shall 
be 1000 gpm at a pressure as required 
to satisfy 4.5 bar at the most remote 
Hose reel outlet valve. 

vi.  The water tank shall have a capacity 

of 60 minutes of operation, dedicated 
direct breeching inlet complete with 
low water level detection, dedicated 
direct breeching inlet and instantane-
ous refilling arrangement. 

 
 
 
 
3.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR BUILT

-UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 m2   

 
vii. The capacity of the fire pump set shall 
be 1500 gpm at a pressure as required 
to satisfy 6.9 bar at the most remote 
landing valve. 

viii. The water tank shall have a capacity 

of 120 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, dedi-
cated direct breeching inlet and in-
stantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 

Table 9.27.: Storage, Warehouse and Industrial Fire Protection Systems 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

1.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR           

1.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR           

iv. Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided as 

per Section 3.11., in a loop to cover 
the entire facility.  

v.  Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 
3.3.  

vi. A dry riser and wet riser System shall 

 
 

not be required. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 733 of 1348 

Table 9.27.: Storage, Warehouse and Industrial Fire Protection Systems 

PREDOMINANT         
OCCUPANCY 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

1. IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR 

AREA IS LESS THAN 900 m2   

1.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR 

AREA IS LESS THAN 900 m2   

 
i.  Hose Reel System shall be provided 
throughout the building as per Sec-
tion 3.3. 

ii.  Dry landing valves and risers shall not 

be required. 

 
 
 
2.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR 

AREA IS 900 m2 - 3600 m2   

 

i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be 

as per storage height and arrange-
ment, in accordance with Table 
9.7.G., P.7.H., 9.7.I., Table 9.7.J., Ta-
ble 9.7.K., Table 9.7.L. 

iii. Hose Reel System shall be provided 
throughout the building as per Sec-
tion 3.3. Dry landing valves shall not 
be required. 

 

 

 

3.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR 
BUILT-UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 
3600 m2   

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be 

as per storage height and arrange-
ment, in accordance with Table 
9.7.G., P.7.H., 9.7.I., Table 9.7.J., Ta-
ble 9.7.K., Table 9.7.L. 

iii. Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided 
as per Section 3.11., in a loop to cov-
er the entire facility.  

iv. Hose Reel System shall be provided 
throughout the building as per Sec-
tion 3.3.  

v.  A dry riser and wet riser System shall 

not be required. 

 
iii. The fire pump capacity shall be 50 

gpm at pressure of 4.5 bar available at 
the remote Hose reel valve. 

iv. Water tank shall have capacity of 45 
minutes of operation, complete with 
low water level detection and instan-
taneous refilling arrangement. 

 
2.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR 

AREA IS 900 m2 - 3600 m2   

 
iv. The capacity of the fire pump set shall 
be as per storage height and arrange-
ment, in accordance with Table 
9.7.G., P.7.H., 9.7.I., Table 9.7.J., Ta-
ble 9.7.K., Table 9.7.L., at pressure as 
required to satisfy 4.5 bar at the most 
remote hose reel valve. 

v.  The water tank shall have capacity of 

60 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, dedi-
cated direct breeching inlet and in-
stantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 
 
3.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR 

BUILT-UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 
m2   

 
 
vi.  The capacity of the fire pump set 

shall be as per storage height and ar-
rangement, in accordance with Table 
9.7.G., P.7.H., 9.7.I., Table 9.7.J., Ta-
ble 9.7.K., Table 9.7.L., at pressure as 
required to satisfy 6.9 bar at the most 
remote Hydrant valve. 

vii.  The water tank shall have capacity of 

60 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, dedi-
cated direct breeching inlet and in-
stantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 
 

K.  WAREHOUSE  
 
IDLE  WOODEN 
AND PLASTIC  
PALLETS 
 
     

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 734 of 1348 

 

Table 9.27.: Storage, Warehouse and Industrial Fire Protection Systems 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

1.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR       

1.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR       

AREA IS LESS THAN 230 m2 

 
i.  Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 3.3. 
Dry landing valves shall not be required. 

 
 
 
 
 
2.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA 

AREA IS LESS THAN 230 m2 

 
ii.  The fire pump capacity shall be 50 gpm 

at pressure of 4.5 bar available at the 
remote hose reel valve. 

iii.  The water tank shall have capacity of 45 
minutes of operation, complete with low 
water level detection and instantaneous 
refilling arrangement. 

 
2.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AR-

OF THE COMPARTMENT IS                                     
230 m2—900 m2  

EA OF THE COMPARTMENT IS                                     
230 m2—900 m2  

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided throughout the 

 
iv. The capacity of the fire pump set shall be 

CLASS I—IV            
MATERIALS  

OCCUPAN-
CY 

L.  WARE-

HOUSE  

 
     WITH           

 
    

(IDENTIFICA
TION OF    
CLASSES OF 
MATERIALS 
SHALL BE AS 
PER         
SECTION 
1.1.25 OF 
THIS         
CHAPTER) 

facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be as per 
storage height and arrangement, in accord-
ance with Table 9.7.M., 9.7.O., Table 
9.7.P., Table 9.7.R., 9.7.S.,  9,7.T.,  9.7.U., 
9.7.V. 9.7.Y., 9.7.X., 9.7.Z.a., 9.7.Z.b., 
9.7.Z.c., 9.7.AA., 9.7.BB., and 9.7.CC.   

iii. Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 3.3. 
Dry landing valves shall not be required. 

 
 
 
3.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA 

IS 901 m2 - 3600 m2   

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided throughout the 

facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be as per 
storage height and arrangement, in accord-
ance with Table 9.7.M., 9.7.O., Table 
9.7.P., Table 9.7.R., 9.7.S.,  9,7.T.,  9.7.U., 
9.7.V. 9.7.Y., 9.7.X., 9.7.Z.a., 9.7.Z.b., 
9.7.Z.c., 9.7.AA., 9.7.BB., and 9.7.CC.   

iii. Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 3.3. 
Dry landing valves shall not be required. 

 
 
 
 
4.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR BUILT-UP 

AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 m2   

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided throughout the 

facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be as per 
storage height and arrangement, in accord-
ance with Table 9.7.M., 9.7.O., Table 
9.7.P., Table 9.7.R., 9.7.S.,  9,7.T.,  9.7.U., 
9.7.V. 9.7.Y., 9.7.X., 9.7.Z.a., 9.7.Z.b., 
9.7.Z.c., 9.7.AA., 9.7.BB., and 9.7.CC.   

iii. Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided as per 
Section 3.11., in a loop to cover the entire 
facility.  

as per storage height and storage ar-
rangement, in accordance with Table 
9.7.M., 9.7.O., Table 9.7.P., Table 9.7.R., 
9.7.S.,  9,7.T.,  9.7.U., 9.7.V. 9.7.Y., 
9.7.X., 9.7.Z.a., 9.7.Z.b., 9.7.Z.c., 9.7.AA., 
9.7.BB., and 9.7.CC.  at a pressure as re-
quired to satisfy 4.5 bar at the most re-
mote Hose reel valve. 

v.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 
60 minutes of operation, complete with 
low water level detection and instanta-
neous refilling arrangement. 

 
3.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AR-

EA IS 901 m2 - 3600 m2   

 
iv. The capacity of the fire pump set shall be 

as per storage height and storage ar-
rangement, in accordance with Table 
9.7.M., 9.7.O., Table 9.7.P., Table 9.7.R., 
9.7.S.,  9,7.T.,  9.7.U., 9.7.V. 9.7.Y., 
9.7.X., 9.7.Z.a., 9.7.Z.b., 9.7.Z.c., 9.7.AA., 
9.7.BB., and 9.7.CC.  at a pressure as re-
quired to satisfy 4.5 bar at the most re-
mote hose reel valve. 

v.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 
60 minutes of operation, complete with 
low water level detection, direct breech-
ing inlet and instantaneous refilling ar-
rangement. 

 
4.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR BUILT-

UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 m2   

 
vi.  The capacity of the fire pump set shall 
be as per storage height and storage ar-
rangement, in accordance with Table 
9.7.M., 9.7.O., Table 9.7.P., Table 9.7.R., 
9.7.S.,  9,7.T.,  9.7.U., 9.7.V. 9.7.Y., 
9.7.X., 9.7.Z.a., 9.7.Z.b., 9.7.Z.c., 9.7.AA., 
9.7.BB., and 9.7.CC.  at a pressure as re-
quired to satisfy 6.9 bar at the most re-
mote Hydrant valve. 

vii.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 
60 minutes of operation, complete with 
low water level detection, direct breech-
ing inlet and instantaneous refilling ar-
rangement. 

iv. Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 3.3.  

v.  A dry riser and wet riser System shall not 

be required. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 735 of 1348 

 
 
PREDOMI-
NANT          
OCCUPANCY 

M.  WAREHOUSE  
 
     PLASTIC,     
RUBBER,   

 
     

Table 9.27.: Storage, Warehouse and Industrial Fire Protection Systems 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

1.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR 

1.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR 

AREA OF THE COMPARTMENT IS 
LESS THAN 230 m2   

 
i.  Hose Reel System shall be provided 
throughout the building as per Sec-
tion 3.3. 

AREA OF THE COMPARTMENT IS LESS 
THAN 230 m2   

 
iii.  The fire pump capacity shall be 50 

gpm at a pressure of 4.5 bar available 
at the remote Hose reel valve. 

ii.  Dry landing valves and risers shall not 

iv.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 

be required. 

 
 
 
2.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR 

AREA OF THE COMPARTMENT IS  
230 m2—900 m2  

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be 

as per storage height and storage 
arrangement, in accordance with 
9.7.X., 9.7.DD.,and 9.7.EE.    

iii. Hose Reel System shall be provided 
throughout the building as per Sec-
tion 3.3. Dry landing valves are not 
required. 

 
 
 
3.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR 

AREA IS 901 m2 - 3600 m2   

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be 

as per storage height and storage 
arrangement, in accordance with 
9.7.X., 9.7.DD.,and 9.7.EE.      

iii. Hose Reel System shall be provided 
throughout the building as per Sec-
tion 3.3. Dry landing valves are not 
required. 

 
 

60 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection and in-
stantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 
2.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR 

AREA OF THE COMPARTMENT IS     
230 m2—900 m2  

 
iv. The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be as per storage height and storage 
arrangement, in accordance with 
9.7.X., 9.7.DD., and 9.7.EE.  at a pres-
sure as required to satisfy 4.5 bar at 
the most remote Hose reel valve. 

v.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 

60 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, direct 
breeching inlet and instantaneous re-
filling arrangement. 

 
 
3.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR 

AREA IS 901 m2 - 3600 m2   

 
iv. The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be as per storage height and storage 
arrangement, in accordance with 
9.7.X., 9.7.DD.,and 9.7.EE. at a pres-
sure as required to satisfy 4.5 bar at 
the most remote hose reel valve. 

v.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 

90 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, direct 
breeching inlet and instantaneous re-
filling arrangement. 

 
4.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR BUILT

-UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 m2   

 
 
vi.  The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be as per storage height and storage 
arrangement, in accordance with 
9.7.X., 9.7.DD.,and 9.7.EE. at a pres-
sure as required to satisfy 6.9 bar at 
the most remote Hydrant valve. 

vii.  The water tank shall have a capacity 
of 90 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, direct 
breeching inlet and instantaneous re-
filling arrangement. 

4.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR 
BUILT-UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 
3600 m2   

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be 

as per storage height and storage 
arrangement, in accordance with 
9.7.X., 9.7.DD., and 9.7.EE.      

iii. Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided 
as per Section 3.11., in a loop to cov-
er the entire facility.  

iv. Hose Reel System shall be provided 
throughout the building as per Sec-
tion 3.3.  

 

v.  A dry riser and wet riser System shall 

not be required. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 736 of 1348Table 9.27.: Storage, Warehouse and Industrial Fire Protection Systems 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

1.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP FLOOR AREA OF 
THE COMPARTMENT IS LESS THAN 
230 m2   

 
i.  Hose Reel System shall be provided 
throughout the building as per and 
Section 3.3. 

ii.  Dry landing valves and risers shall not 

1.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP FLOOR AREA OF 
THE COMPARTMENT IS LESS THAN  
230 m2   

 
iii.  The fire pump capacity shall be 50 gpm 
at a pressure of 4.5 bar available at the 
remote Hose reel valve. 

iv.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 

be required. 

 
 
 
2.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP FLOOR AREA OF 

THE COMPARTMENT IS                   
230 m2—900 m2  

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be 

as per storage height and storage 
arrangement, in accordance with  
Table 9.7.FF.    

iii. Hose Reel System shall be provided 
throughout the building as per Sec-
tion 3.3. Dry landing valves are not 
required. 

45 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection and in-
stantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 
2.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP FLOOR AREA OF 
THE COMPARTMENT IS                       
230 m2—900 m2  

 
iv. The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be as per storage height and storage 
arrangement, in accordance with           
Table 9.7.FF. at a pressure as required 
to satisfy 4.5 bar at the most remote 
Hose reel valve. 

v.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 

60 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection and in-
stantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 
3.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP FLOOR AREA IS                      

 
3.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP FLOOR AREA IS         

 

 
 

PREDOMI-
NANT          
OCCUPANCY 

N.  WAREHOUSE  
 
     TIRES   
 
     

901 m2 - 3600 m2   

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be 

as per storage height and storage 
arrangement, in accordance with Ta-
ble 9.7.FF.         

iii. Hose Reel System shall be provided 
throughout the building as per Sec-
tion 3.3. Dry landing valves are not 
required. 

 
 

4.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR 
BUILT-UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 
3600 m2   

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be 

as per storage height and storage 
arrangement, in accordance with Ta-
ble 9.7.FF.         

iii. Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided 
as per Section 3.11., in a loop to cov-
er the entire facility.  

iv. Hose Reel System shall be provided 
throughout the building as per Sec-
tion 3.3.  

v.  A dry riser and wet riser System shall 

not be required. 

 

901 m2 - 3600 m2   

 
iv. The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be as per storage height and storage 
arrangement, in accordance with           
Table 9.7.FF. at a pressure as required 
to satisfy 4.5 bar at the most remote 
hose reel valve. 

v.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 

90 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection direct 
breeching inlet and instantaneous re-
filling arrangement. 

 
4.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR BUILT-

UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 m2   

 
 
vi. The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be as per storage height and storage 
arrangement, in accordance with Table 
9.7.FF. at a pressure as required to 
satisfy 6.9 bar at the most remote Hy-
drant valve. 

vii. The water tank shall have a capacity of 

90 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, direct 
breeching inlet and instantaneous re-
filling arrangement. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 737 of 1348 

 
 
PREDOMI-
NANT          
OCCUPANCY 

Table 9.27.: Storage, Warehouse and Industrial Fire Protection Systems 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

1.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP FLOOR AREA OF 
THE COMPARTMENT IS LESS THAN 
230 m2   

O.  WAREHOUSE  
 
     ROLLED PAPER   
 
 
i.  Hose Reel System shall be provided 
     
throughout the building as per Sec-
tion 3.3. 

1.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP FLOOR AREA OF 
THE COMPARTMENT IS LESS THAN 
230 m2   

 
iii.  The fire pump capacity shall be 50 

gpm at a pressure of 4.5 bar available 
at the remote Hose reel valve. 

ii.  Dry landing valves and risers shall not 

iv.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 

be required. 

 
 
 
2.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP FLOOR AREA OF 

THE COMPARTMENT IS                   
230 m2—900 m2  

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be 

as per storage height and storage 
arrangement, in accordance with  
Table 9.7.GG.    

iii. Hose Reel System shall be provided 
throughout the building as per Sec-
tion 3.3. Dry landing valves are not 
required. 

45 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection and in-
stantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 
2.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP FLOOR AREA OF 
THE COMPARTMENT IS                      
230 m2—900 m2  

 
iv. The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be as per storage height and storage 
arrangement, in accordance with           
Table 9.7.GG. at a pressure as required 
to satisfy 4.5 bar at the most remote 
Hose reel valve. 

v.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 

60 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection and in-
stantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 
 
3.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP FLOOR AREA IS                      

 
 
3.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP FLOOR AREA IS         

901 m2 - 3600 m2   

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be 

as per storage height and storage 
arrangement, in accordance with  
Table 9.7.GG.         

iii. Hose Reel System shall be provided 
throughout the building as per Sec-
tion 3.3. Dry landing valves are not 
required 

 
 

4.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR 
BUILT-UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 
3600 m2   

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided through-

out the facility as per Section 3.5. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be 

as per storage height and storage 
arrangement, in accordance with  
Table 9.7.GG.         

iii. Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided 
as per Section 3.11., in a loop to cov-
er the entire facility.  

iv. Hose Reel System shall be provided 
throughout the building as per Sec-
tion 3.3.  

v.  A dry riser and wet riser System shall 

not be required. 

 

901 m2 - 3600 m2   

 
iv. The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be as per storage height and storage 
arrangement, in accordance with            
Table 9.7.GG. at a pressure as required 
to satisfy 4.5 bar at the most remote 
hose reel valve. 

v.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 

90 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, direct 
breeching inlet and instantaneous re-
filling arrangement. 

 
4.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR BUILT

-UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 m2   

 
 
vi.  The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be as per storage height and storage 
arrangement, in accordance with           
Table 9.7.GG. at a pressure as required 
to satisfy 6.9 bar at the most remote 
Hydrant valve. 

vii.  The water tank shall have a capacity 
of 90 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, direct 
breeching inlet and instantaneous re-
filling arrangement. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 738 of 1348 

Table 9.27.: Storage, Warehouse and Industrial Fire Protection Systems 

OCCUPANCY  SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

P. COLD        
STORAGE 

 
(STORAGE         
FACILITIES WITH 
BELOW 40C     
TEMPERATURES) 
 
 

1.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP FLOOR AREA IS 

LESS THAN 230 m2 

 
i.  Hose Reel System shall be provided 
throughout the building as per Sec-
tion 3.3. 

ii.  Dry landing valves and risers shall not 

be required. 

 
 
 
 
2.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP FLOOR AREA IS  

BETWEEN 230 m2—900 m2   

 

i.  Dry Type Sprinklers shall be provided 

throughout the facility as per         
Section 3.6. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be 
as per hazard classification, storage 
height and storage arrangement, in 
accordance with Table 9.7.H., Table 
9.7.I., Table 9.8.A., Table 9.7.Z.a., 
9.7.Z.b., Table 9.7.AA.a., 9.7.AA.b., 
and 9.7.AA.c.,  

iii. Hose Reel System shall be provided 
throughout the building as per Sec-
tion 3.3. Dry landing valves shall not 
be required. 

 

 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

1.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP FLOOR AREA IS 

LESS THAN 230 m2 

 
iii.   The capacity of the fire pump set 
shall be 50 gpm at a pressure as re-
quired to satisfy 4.5 bar at the most 
remote Hose reel outlet valve. 

iv.  The water tank shall have a capacity 
of 30 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection and 
instantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 
2.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP FLOOR AREA IS  

BETWEEN 230 m2—900 m2   

 
iv. The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be as per storage height and storage 
arrangement, in accordance with Ta-
ble 9.7.H., Table 9.7.I., Table 9.8.A., 
Table 9.7.Z.a., 9.7.Z.b., Table 
9.7.AA.a., 9.7.AA.b., and 9.7.AA.c., at 
a pressure as required to satisfy 4.5 
bar at the most remote Hose reel 
valve. 

v.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 

45 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection and 
instantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 
 
 
3.  IF TOTAL FLOOR AREA IS  BETWEEN                    

901 m2—3600 m2   

 
iv. The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be as per storage height and storage 
arrangement, in accordance Table 
9.7.H., Table 9.7.I., Table 9.8.A., Table 
9.7.Z.a., 9.7.Z.b., Table 9.7.AA.a., 
9.7.AA.b., and 9.7.AA.c.,  at a pressure 
as required to satisfy 6.9 bar at the 
most remote Hose reel valve. 

v.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 

60 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, direct 
breeching inlet and instantaneous re-
filling arrangement. 

 

3.  IF TOTAL FLOOR AREA IS  BETWEEN                    

901 m2—3600 m2   

 
i.  Dry Type Sprinklers shall be provided 
throughout the facility as per                 
Section 3.6. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be 
as per storage height and storage ar-
rangement, in accordance with  Table 
9.7.H., Table 9.7.I., Table 9.8.A., Ta-
ble 9.7.Z.a., 9.7.Z.b., Table 9.7.AA.a., 
9.7.AA.b., and 9.7.AA.c.,  

iii. Hose Reel System shall be provided 
throughout the building as per Sec-
tion 3.3. Dry landing valves shall not 
be required. 

 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 739 of 1348COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

 
4.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR BUILT

-UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 m2   

 
vi.  The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be as per storage height and storage 
arrangement, in accordance Table 
9.7.H., Table 9.7.I., Table 9.8.A., Table 
9.7.Z.a., 9.7.Z.b., Table 9.7.AA.a., 
9.7.AA.b., and 9.7.AA.c., .at a pres-
sure as required to satisfy 6.9 bar at 
the most remote Hydrant  valve. 

vii.  The water tank shall have a capacity 
of 60 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, direct 
breeching inlet and instantaneous re-
filling arrangement. 

 
4.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR 
BUILT-UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 
3600 m2   

 
i.  Dry Type Sprinklers shall be provid-

ed throughout the facility as per            
Section 3.6. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be 

as per storage height and storage 
arrangement, in accordance Table 
9.7.H., Table 9.7.I., Table 9.8.A., 
Table 9.7.Z.a., 9.7.Z.b., Table 
9.7.AA.a., 9.7.AA.b., and 9.7.AA.c.,  
iii. Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided 

as per Section 3.11., in a loop to 
cover the entire facility.  

iv. Hose Reel System shall be provided 
throughout the building as per Sec-
tion 3.3.  

v.  A dry riser and wet riser System shall 

not be required. 

 

Table 9.27.: Storage, Warehouse and Industrial Fire Protection Systems 

OCCUPANCY 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

P. COLD              

STORAGE 

 
(STORAGE            
FACILITIES WITH 
BELOW 40C       
TEMPERATURES) 
 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 740 of 1348 

Table 9.27.: Storage, Warehouse and Industrial Fire Protection Systems 

OCCUPANCY  SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

1.  GROUP I AIRCRAFT HANGERS       

1.  GROUP I AIRCRAFT HANGERS            

Q. AIRCRAFT 
HANGERS 

 
 

(Access door height over 8.5 m/A sin-
gle fire area is in excess of 3716 m2) 

 
 
xii.   The capacity of the fire pump set 

shall be 3000 gpm at a pressure as 
required to satisfy 6.9 bar at the 
most remote yard hydrant outlet 
valve. However, the fire pump ca-
pacity might increase depending on 
the zone and fire area considerations 
which are dependent on the aircraft 
size. 

xiii.  The water tank shall have a capacity 

of 60 minutes of operation, com-
plete with low water level detection 
and instantaneous refilling arrange-
ment. 

xiv.  The foam concentrate shall be for a 

minimum of 10 minute duration. 

(Access door height over 8.5 m/A sin-
gle fire area is in excess of 3716 m2) 

 
i.  A foam water deluge system shall be 
provided for the hanger as per          
Section 3.9 and Table 9.11. 

ii.  The foam discharge density shall be a 

minimum of 0.16 gpm/ft2 

iii.  The area of operation under a single 
foam water deluge system shall not 
exceed 1394 m2 (15,000ft2). 

iv.  The maximum distance between 

v. 

sprinklers/open discharge devices ei-
ther on branch line or between branch 
line shall not exceed 3.7 m. 
If the open door of the hanger inter-
feres in the intended discharge 
pattern, additional sprinkler/open dis-
charge devices heads shall be installed 
near the door. 

vi.  Sprinklers/open discharge devices of 
different orifice sizes and plates shall 
not be used. 

vii.  A foam water hand hose system shall 
be installed throughout the hanger as 
per Table 9.11.13. with design densi-
ties as appropriate as per Table 
9.11.C. 

viii. Each hand hose connection shall be a 
minimum of 38 mm (11∕2 in.) in size 
and fitted with a control valve. The 
hose shall be of a diameter to provide 
a minimum flow of 60 gpm. 

ix.  Standard Sprinklers shall be provided 
at office, tool rooms and non-service 
and non aircraft storage area as per             
Section 3.5. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

x.  Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided 

as per Section 3.11., in a loop to cover 
the entire hanger or group of hangers.  

xi.  A dry riser, wet riser and hose Reel 

system shall not be required. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 741 of 1348 

 

Table 9.27.: Storage, Warehouse and Industrial Fire Protection Systems 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET 
AND FIRE WATER TANK CA-
PACITIES 

2.  GROUP II AND III AIRCRAFT HANGERS  (Access 

2.  GROUP II AND III AIRCRAFT 

OCCUPAN-
CY 

Q. AIRCRAFT 
HANGERS 

 
 

door height is 8.5 m or less and A single fire 
area is below 3716 m2) AND PAINT HANGERS 

 
i.  The foam water deluge system shall be provid-
ed for the hanger as per Section 3.9 and Table 
9.11. A supplementary system should also be 
provided under wings in accordance with NFPA 
409. 

ii.  The foam discharge density shall be minimum 

of 0.17 gpm/ft2 

iii. Area of operation under a single foam water 

deluge system shall not exceed 465 m2 
(5,000ft2). 

iv. The maximum distance between sprinklers/

open discharge devices either on branch line or 
between branch line shall not exceed 3.7 m. 

v.  If open door of the hanger interferes in the in-
tended discharge pattern, additional sprinkler/
open discharge devices heads shall be installed 
near the door. 

vi. Sprinklers/open discharge devices of different 

orifice sizes and plates shall not be used. 

vii.  A foam water hand hose system shall be in-
stalled throughout the hanger as per Table 
9.11.13. with design densities as appropriate as 
per Table 9.11.C. 

viii.Each hand hose connection shall be a mini-

mum of 38 mm (11∕2 in.) in size and fitted with 
a control valve. The hose shall be of a diameter 
to provide a minimum flow of 60 gpm. 

ix. Standard Sprinklers shall be provided at office, 

tool rooms and non-service and non aircraft 
storage area as per  Section 3.5. 

x.  Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided as per         

Section 3.11., in a loop to cover the entire 
hanger or group of hangers.  

xi. A dry riser, wet riser and hose Reel system shall 

not be required. 

 
3.  GROUP IV AIRCRAFT HANGERS (Membrane 
covered steel structure) AND UNFUELED AIR-
CRAFT HANGERS 

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided throughout the 

facility as per  Section 3.5. 

ii.  The design density shall be a minimum of 0.17 

gpm over the operating area of 465 m2 
(5,000ft2). 

iii. Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided as per                

HANGERS  (Access door height is 
8.5 m or less and A single fire 
area is below 3716 m2) AND 
PAINT HANGERS 

 
xii.   The capacity of the fire pump 

set shall be 1500 gpm at a pres-
sure as required to satisfy 6.9 
bar at the most remote Yard 
hydrant outlet valve. However, 
the fire pump capacity might 
increase depending on the sim-
ultaneously activated zones  
and fire area considerations 
which are dependent on the 
aircraft size. 

xiii.  The water tank shall have a ca-
pacity of 60 minutes of opera-
tion, complete with low water 
level detection, direct breech-
ing inlet and instantaneous re-
filling arrangement. 

xiv. The foam concentrate shall be 

for a minimum of 10 minute 
duration. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.  GROUP IV AIRCRAFT HANGERS 
(Membrane covered steel struc-
ture) AND UNFUELED AIRCRAFT 
HANGERS 

 
v.   The capacity of the fire pump set 

shall be 1500 gpm at a pressure 
as required to satisfy 6.9 bar at 
the most remote Yard hydrant 
outlet valve. However, fire pump 
capacity might increase depend-
ing on the might increase de-
pending on the simultaneously 
activated zones and fire area con-
siderations which are dependent 
on the aircraft size 

Section 3.11., in a loop to cover the entire 
hanger or group of hangers.  

iv. A dry riser, wet riser and hose Reel system shall 

not be required. 

 

vi.  The water tank shall have a ca-
pacity of 60 minutes of opera-
tion, complete with low water 
level detection, direct breeching 
inlet and instantaneous refilling 
arrangement. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 742 of 1348 

 

Table 9.27.: Storage, Warehouse and Industrial Fire Protection Systems 

OCCUPANCY  SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

throughout the building as per Section 3.3. 

 
i.  Hose Reel System shall be provided 

1.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP FLOOR AREA OF THE 
COMPARTMENT IS LESS THAN  230 m2   

R. WAREHOUSE 
FOR INDOOR 
STORAGE OF 
FLAMMABLE 
AND COM-
BUSTIBLE 
 
LIQUIDS 
 
 
AND                    
 
AEROSOLS 
 
2.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP FLOOR AREA OF THE 

ii.  Dry landing valves and risers shall not be 

required. 

 
 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

1.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP FLOOR AREA OF 

THE COMPARTMENT IS LESS THAN 230 
m2   

 
ii.  The fire pump capacity shall be 50 gpm 

at pressure of 4.5 bar available at the 
most remote hose reel valve. 

iii.  The water tank shall have capacity of 

45 minutes of operation, complete with 
low water level detection and instanta-
neous refilling arrangement. 

 
2.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP FLOOR AREA OF 
THE COMPARTMENT IS 231 m2—900 
m2  

 
iv. The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be as per storage configuration and 
storage arrangement, in accordance 
with 9.7.HH. 9.7.II. 9.7.JJ. and 9.11.B., 
at a pressure as required to satisfy 4.5 
bar at the most remote Hose reel valve. 
v.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 

120 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, direct 
breeching inlet and instantaneous re-
filling arrangement. 

vi.  The foam solution reserve shall be for 

15 minutes operation. 

 
3.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP FLOOR AREA IS         

901 m2 - 3600 m2   

 
iv. The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be as per storage configuration and 
storage arrangement, in accordance 
with 9.7.HH. 9.7.II. 9.7.JJ. 9.11.B., at a 
pressure as required to satisfy 6.9 bar 
at the most remote hose reel valve. 

v.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 

120 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, direct 
breeching inlet and instantaneous re-
filling arrangement. 

vi.  The foam solution reserve shall be for 

15 minutes operation. 

 
4.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR BUILT-

UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 m2   

 
vi.   The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be as per storage configuration and 
storage arrangement, in accordance 
with 9.7.HH. 9.7.II. 9.7.JJ. 9.11.B., at a 
pressure as required to satisfy 6.9 bar 
at the most remote Hydrant Valve. 

vii.   The water tank shall have a capacity 

of 120 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, direct 
breeching inlet and instantaneous re-
filling arrangement. 

viii.  The foam solution reserve shall be for 

15 minutes operation. 

COMPARTMENT IS                                     
231 m2—900 m2  

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided throughout 
the facility as per Section 3.5. or Foam 
Sprinklers shall be provided throughout as 
per Section 3.9. 

ii.  The design criteria shall be as per storage 

height and storage arrangement, in ac-
cordance with Table 9.7.HH, 9.7.II, 9.7.JJ, 
9.11.B, and in-rack arrangement as per 
Table 9.7.KK  

iii. Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 3.3. 
Dry landing valves shall not be required. 

 
 
3.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP FLOOR AREA IS                      

901 m2 - 3600 m2   

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided throughout 

the facility as per Section 3.5. or foam 
sprinkler shall be provided throughout as 
per Section 3.9. 

ii.  The design criteria shall be as per storage 

height and storage arrangement, in ac-
cordance with Table 9.7.HH, 9.7.II, 9.7.JJ, 
9.11.B., and in-rack arrangement as per 
Table 9.7.KK  

iii. Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 3.3. 
Dry landing valves shall not be required. 

 
 

4.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR BUILT-UP 

AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 m2   

 
i.  Sprinklers shall be provided throughout 
the facility as per Section 3.5. or Foam 
Sprinkler shall be provided throughout as 
per Section 3.9. 

ii.  The design criteria shall be as per storage 

height and storage arrangement, in ac-
cordance with Table 9.7.HH, 9.7.II, 9.7.JJ, 
9.11.B., 9. and in-rack arrangement as per 
Table 9.7.KK 

iii. Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided as per 
Section 3.11., in a loop to cover the entire 
facility. Where foam sprinklers are provid-
ed, hydrant system shall also incorporate 
foam discharge.  

 

iv. Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per Section 3.3.  

v.  A dry riser and wet riser System shall not 

be required. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 743 of 1348 

 

Table 9.27.: Storage, Warehouse and Industrial Fire Protection Systems 

OCCUPANCY  SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

S. INDUSTRIAL 
OCCUPANCY 
INVOLVING 
PROCESSES, 
ACTIVITIES 
THAT                    
HANDLE 
FLAMMABLE 
AND COM-
BUSTIBLE 
LIQUIDS 
(EXCEPT 
HANGER) 

1.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP FLOOR AREA OF 
THE COMPARTMENT IS LESS THAN 
230 m2   

 
i.  Hose Reel System shall be provided 
throughout the building as per Sec-
tion 3.2. and Section 3.3. 

ii.  Dry landing valves and risers shall not 

be required. 

 
 
2.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP FLOOR AREA OF 

1.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP FLOOR AREA OF THE 
COMPARTMENT IS LESS THAN 230 m2   

 
iii. The fire pump capacity shall be 50 gpm 
at a pressure of 4.5 bar available at the 
remote Hose reel valve. 

iv.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 
45 minutes of operation, complete with 
low water level detection and instanta-
neous refilling arrangement. 

 
2.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP FLOOR AREA OF THE 

THE COMPARTMENT IS                             
 
230 m2—900 m2  
iv. The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

COMPARTMENT IS 230 m2—900 m2  

 
i.  Foam Sprinklers shall be provided 

throughout the facility as per Section 
3.9. 

ii.  The foam sprinkler Design criteria 
shall be as per as per Table 9.11.C. 
iii. Hose Reel System shall be provided 
throughout the building as per Sec-
tion 3.3. Hose system shall also incor-
porate the foam application. Dry 
landing valves shall not be required. 

be as per 9.11.C. at pressure as required 
to satisfy 4.5 bar at the most remote 
Hose reel valve. 

v.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 

120 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, direct 
breeching inlet and instantaneous refill-
ing arrangement. 

vi. The foam solution reserve shall be for 15 

minutes operation. 

 
 
3.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP FLOOR AREA IS                      

 
 
3.  IF TOTAL BUILT-UP FLOOR AREA IS         

 
 

 

901 m2 - 3600 m2   

 
iv. The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be as per 9.11.C. at a pressure as re-
quired to satisfy 6.9 bar at the most re-
mote hose reel valve. 

v.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 

120 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, direct 
breeching inlet and instantaneous refill-
ing arrangement. 

vi.  The foam solution reserve shall be for a 

15 minutes operation. 

 
4.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR BUILT-

UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 3600 m2   

 
 
vi.   The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be as per 9.11.C. at pressure as re-
quired to satisfy 6.9 bar at the most 
remote hydrant valve. 

vii.   The water tank shall have capacity of 

120 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, direct 
breeching inlet and instantaneous refill-
ing arrangement. 

viii.  The foam solution reserve shall be for 

15 minutes operation. 

901 m2 - 3600 m2   

 
i.  Foam Sprinklers shall be provided 

throughout the facility as per Section 
3.9. 

ii.  The foam sprinkler Design criteria 
shall be as per as per Table 9.11.C. 
iii. Hose Reel System shall be provided 
throughout the building as per Sec-
tion 3.3. The hose system shall also 
incorporate foam application. Dry 
landing valves shall not be required. 

 
 

4.  IF SUM OF ALL GROUND FLOOR 
BUILT-UP AREAS IS MORE THAN 
3600 m2   

 
i.  Foam Sprinklers shall be provided 

throughout the facility as per Section 
3.9. 

ii.  The foam sprinkler Design criteria 

shall be as per as per Table 9.11.C.  
iii. Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provided 
as per Section 3.11., in a loop to cov-
er the entire facility. Where foam 
sprinklers are provided, hydrant sys-
tem shall also incorporate foam dis-
charge. 

iv. Hose Reel System shall be provided 
throughout the building as per Sec-
tion 3.3.  

v.  A dry riser and wet riser System shall 

not be required. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 744 of 1348 

 

Table 9.27.: Storage, Warehouse and Industrial Fire Protection Systems 

PREDOMINANT        
OCCUPANCY 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

1.  IF THE STORAGE AREA IS LESS THAN 
230 m2 AND CAPACITY OF FLAMMA-
BLE, COMSBUTIBLE LIQUID STORAGE 
TANK IS LESS THAN 190 m3  

1.  IF THE STORAGE AREA IS LESS THAN 
230 m2 AND CAPACITY OF FLAMMA-
BLE, COMSBUTIBLE LIQUID STOR-
AGE TANK IS LESS THAN 190 m3  

T. STORAGE OF 

FLAMMABLE 
AND            
COMBUSTIBLE         
LIQUIDS IN 
ABOVE 
GROUND     
STORAGE 
TANKS 

 
iv. The fire pump capacity shall be 100 
gpm at a pressure of 4.5 bar availa-
ble at the remote Hose reel valve. 

v.  The water tank shall have a capacity 

of 60 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection and 
instantaneous refilling arrangement. 

vi. The foam reserve shall be for a 15 

minutes  operation. 

 
 
2.  IF THE STORAGE AREA IS MORE 
THAN 230 m2 OR CAPACITY OF 
FLAMMABLE, COMSBUTIBLE LIQUID 
STORAGE TANK IS MORE THAN         
190 m3  

 
 
vii. The capacity of the fire pump set 

and foam reserve shall be suitable 
for a single largest hazard. Addition-
al capacity of 1000 gpm shall be 
added for hose stream demand. 

viii. The water tank shall have a capacity 

of 120 minutes of operation, com-
plete with low water level detec-
tion, direct breeching inlet and in-
stantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 
 
 

 
i.  Hose Reel System shall be provided 
throughout the building as per Sec-
tion 3.3. 

ii.  The hose stations shall incorporate 

the foam application. 

iii. Dry landing valves and risers shall not 

be required. 

 
 
 
 
2.  IF THE STORAGE AREA IS MORE 
THAN 230 m2 OR CAPACITY OF 
FLAMMABLE, COMSBUTIBLE LIQUID 
STORAGE TANK IS MORE THAN         
190 m3  

 
i.  Aboveground storage tank storing 
class I or class II liquids shall be pro-
tected with fixed low expansion foam 
system in accordance with             
Section 3.9., and Table 9.11.A.,  
9.11.E., and 9.11.F. (as applicable). 
ii.  The tanks or section of the tanks ex-

posed to heat radiation of greater 
than 12.2 Kw/m2 due to fire in adja-
cent tanks or facility, shall be provid-
ed cooling  with deluge water spray 
system in accordance with Section 
3.8., and Table 9.10.D.  

iii. Yard hydrant shall be provided as per 
Section 3.11, in loop to cover the en-
tire facility. Hydrant shall incorporate 
option for foam application as per 
Section 3.9 and Table 9.11.C., Table 
9.11.D., 9.11.G., and 9.11.H. (as ap-
plicable). 

iv. Hose Reel System shall be provided 
throughout the building as per Sec-
tion 3.3. 

v.  The hose stations shall incorporate 

the foam application. 

vi. Dry landing valves and risers shall not 

be required. 

 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 745 of 1348 

 

Table 9.27.: Storage, Warehouse and Industrial Fire Protection Systems 

OCCUPANCY  SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

U. OPEN YARD 

STORAGE 
OF                   
MATERIALS 
OTHER 
THAN 
FLAMMA-
BLE AND 
COMBUS-
TIBLE               
MATERIALS 

 
 

1.  IF TOTAL OPEN STORAGE YARD IS 
LESS THAN 2000 m2  AND STORING 
LIGHT HAZARD MATERIALS AS PER 
SECTION 1.1.23., AND TABLE 9.1. 

 
i.  Fire extinguishers as per Chapter 4. 
 
 
2.  IF TOTAL OPEN STORAGE YARD IS 

MORE THAN 2000 m2  AND STORING 
LIGHT HAZARD MATERIALS AS PER 
SECTION 1.1.23., AND TABLE 9.1. 

 
i.  Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per      
Section 3.3. Dry landing valves are 
not required. 

ii.  Equipment and cabinet shall be ap-

proved for outdoor door application. 

 
 
 
3.  IF TOTAL OPEN STORAGE YARD IS 

MORE THAN 1000 m2  AND STORING 
MATERIALS OTHER THAN LIGHT 
HAZARD MATERIALS AS PER         
SECTION 1.1.23., AND TABLE 9.1. 

 
i.  Hose Reel System shall be provided 

throughout the building as per       
Section 3.3. Dry landing valves are 
not required. 

ii.  The equipment and cabinet shall be 
approved for outdoor door applica-
tion. 

 
 
 
4.  IF TOTAL OPEN STORAGE YARD IS 

MORE THAN 3600 m2  AND STORING 
ANY MATERIALS, OTHER THAN 
FLAMMABLE AND COMBUSTIBLE 
MATERIALS 

 
i.  Yard hydrant shall be provided as per 
Section 3.11, in loop to cover the en-
tire facility.  

ii.  Trolley type foam extinguishers shall 

be provided for the outdoor emer-
gencies. 

iii. The equipment and cabinet shall be 
approved for outdoor door applica-
tion. 

iv. Hose reel system or landing valves 

shall not be required. 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 
FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.  IF TOTAL OPEN STORAGE YARD IS 

MORE THAN 2000 m2  AND STORING 
LIGHT HAZARD MATERIALS AS PER   
SECTION 1.1.23., AND TABLE 9.1. 

 
iii.  The fire pump capacity shall be 50 gpm 
at a pressure of 4.5 bar available at the 
remote Hose reel valve. 

iv.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 
30 minutes of operation, complete with 
low water level detection and instanta-
neous refilling arrangement. 

 
 
3.  IF TOTAL OPEN STORAGE YARD IS 

MORE THAN 1000 m2  AND STORING 
MATERIALS OTHER THAN LIGHT HAZ-
ARD MATERIALS AS PER                       
SECTION 1.1.23., AND TABLE 9.1. 

 
iii. The fire pump capacity shall be 50 gpm 
at a pressure of 4.5 bar available at the 
remote Hose reel valve. 

iv.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 
30 minutes of operation, complete with 
low water level detection and instanta-
neous refilling arrangement. 

 
 
 
4.  IF TOTAL OPEN STORAGE YARD IS 

MORE THAN 3600 m2  AND STORING 
ANY MATERIALS, OTHER THAN FLAM-
MABLE AND COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS 

 
v. The fire pump capacity shall be 500 gpm 
at a pressure of 6.9 bar available at the 
most remote hydrant valve. 

vi.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 
60 minutes of operation, complete with 
low water level detection, direct breech-
ing inlet and instantaneous refilling ar-
rangement. 

 
 
 

V. NURSERIES 

i.  Fire extinguishers as per Chapter 4. 

 

(PLANTS 
AND           
VEGETA-
TION) 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 746 of 1348 

4.12.  Tunnel Fire Protection Systems 

 
4.12.1.  Tunnel shall be provided with Fire protection Systems in compliance with Table 

9.28. and Auxiliary Rooms fire protection systems, if any, as per Table 9.30.  

Table 9.28.: Tunnel Fire Protection Systems 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS  COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND FIRE WATER 

TANK CAPACITIES 

 

OCCUPAN-
CY 

A. CABLE     
TUNNELS 

 
 

1.  IF LENGTH OF THE CABLE 
TUNNEL IS LESS THAN 60 
m 

 
i.  An automatic Deluge Wa-

1.  IF LENGTH OF THE TUNNEL IS LESS THAN 60 m 
 
iii.   The capacity of the fire pump set shall be sufficient 

to satisfy minimum of 2 adjacent deluge water 
spray system zones at a pressure as required to 
satisfy 4.5 bar at the most remote Hose reel outlet 
valve. 

iv.   Where water mist is provided, the capacity of the 
fire pump set for water mist system shall be as per 
the manufacturer’s specifications and approved 
design and installation guideline. 

v.    The water tank shall have a capacity of 60 minutes 
of operation, complete with low water level detec-
tion and instantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 
 
2.  IF LENGTH OF THE TUNNEL IS MORE THAN 60 m 
 
iii.   The capacity of the fire pump set shall be sufficient 

to satisfy minimum of 2 adjacent deluge water 
spray system zones at a pressure as required to 
satisfy 6.9 bar at the most remote landing valve. 

iv.   Where water mist is provided, the capacity of the 
fire pump set for water mist system shall be as per 
the manufacturer’s specifications and approved 
design and installation guideline. 

v.   The water tank shall have a capacity of 60 minutes 
of operation, complete with low water level detec-
tion, direct breeching inlet and instantaneous refill-
ing arrangement. 

ter Spray System as per 
Section 3.8.  OR Automatic 
Water Mist System, as per 
Section 3.10, shall be pro-
vided. 

ii.  A dry riser + Hose Reel Sys-

tem shall be provided at 
the Tunnel entry points, as 
per Section 3.2 and  Sec-
tion 3.3. 

 
2.  IF LENGTH OF THE TUNNEL 

IS MORE THAN 60 m 

 
i.  An automatic Deluge Wa-

ter Spray as per Section 
3.8.  OR Automatic Water 
Mist System, as per Section 
3.10, shall be provided. 

ii.  A wet riser System shall be 

provided throughout the 
building as per Section 3.4. 

 
 
 

 

B. ROAD/RAIL 

TUNNELS 

1.  IF LENGTH OF THE TUNNEL 

IS LESS THAN 90 M 

 
i.  None 
 
 
2.  IF LENGTH OF THE TUNNEL 

IS 90 m—1000 m 

 
i.  A wet riser System shall be 

provided throughout the 
building as per Section 3.4. 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
2. IF LENGTH OF THE TUNNEL IS 90 m—1000 m 
 
 
ii.   The capacity of the fire pump set shall be 750 gpm 

at a pressure as required to satisfy 6.9 bar at the 
most remote Landing valve. 

iii.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 60 minutes 
of operation, complete with low water level detec-
tion, direct breeching inlet and instantaneous refill-
ing arrangement. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 747 of 1348 

Table 9.28.: Tunnel Fire Protection Systems 

 OCCUPANCY 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND FIRE 
WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

3.  IF LENGTH OF THE TUNNEL IS                

3.  IF LENGTH OF THE TUNNEL IS                

MORE THAN 1000 m 

 
i.  An automatic deluge Water 
Spray system as per Section 
3.8.  OR an automatic water 
mist system, as per Section 
3.10, shall be provided. 

ii.  A Class III wet riser System shall 

be provided throughout the 
building as per Section 3.4. 

iii. Breeching inlets shall be pro-
vided at both openings of the 
tunnel. 

MORE THAN 1000 m 

 
iii.   The capacity of the fire pump set shall be 
sufficient to satisfy minimum of 2 adjacent 
deluge water spray system zones at a 
pressure as required to satisfy 6.9 bar at 
the most remote landing valve. 

iv.   Where water mist is provided, the capaci-
ty of the fire pump set for water mist sys-
tem shall be for a period of 1 hour and 
shall be as per the manufacturer’s specifi-
cations and approved design and installa-
tion guideline. 

v.    The water tank shall have a capacity of 60 
minutes of operation, complete with low 
water level detection and instantaneous 
refilling arrangement. 

B. ROAD/RAIL 

TUNNELS 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 748 of 1348 

4.13.  Various Locations and Extension of Fire Protection Systems 

 
4.13.1.  Various locations in a building shall be protected with Automatic Sprinkler Systems 
as per Table 9.29.  The building sprinkler system shall be extended to comply with 
requirements of Table 9.29. 

Table 9.29.: Various Locations and Extension of Fire Protection Systems 

LOCATION/     
HAZARD 

A. ATRIUMS 
 

B. BALCONIES 

C. RAIN SCREEN/ 

GLAZING 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

Section 3.5. 

Section 3.5. 

i.  Atriums should be provided with automatic sprinkler system as per                

ii.  Sprinkler heads should be installed immediately adjacent to atrium opening. 

And non-combustible material draft stops of 450 mm deep shall be provided.  

i.  Exterior balconies shall be provided with automatic sprinkler system as per 

ii.  Sidewall Sprinkler heads or pendent sprinklers shall be installed at exterior 

balconies of such buildings where sprinkler protection is required. 

iii. Balcony sprinkler coverage shall not exceed 12 m2  per sprinkler head. 
iv. Sprinkler temperature rating shall be 790C. 

i.  Glazing of the building envelope shall be protected with sprinkler system as 

per Section 3.5. 

ii.  Sprinkler protection shall be from the interior of the building by extending 
sprinkler system on ceiling with window type pendent or on walls with win-
dow type side wall sprinklers, installed such that discharge pattern covers the 
interior of the glazing to provide draft curtain effect. 

D. STAIRS 

i.  The stair top (Top of the shaft) and first accessible landing above the bottom 

of the shaft shall be provided with sprinkler system as per Section 3.5. 

E. ELEVATOR SHAFT 

i.  The sidewall spray sprinklers in accordance with Section 3.5. shall be installed 
at the bottom of each elevator hoistway (shaft) not more than 600 mm above 
the floor of the pit. 

F. ABOVE FALSE 

CEILING 

G. BATHROOMS 

i.  Sprinklers shall not be required. However, compartmentation and fire stop-

ping shall be considered at regular intervals. 

ii.  In bathrooms above false ceiling spaces where heaters are installed, such 

above false ceiling spaces shall be protected with sprinklers as per Section 3.5. 

i.  In bathrooms above false ceiling spaces where heaters are installed, such 

above false ceiling spaces shall be protected with sprinklers as per Section 3.5. 
ii.  Public washrooms and bathrooms shall be provided with a sprinkler system as 

iii. Residential, Hotel and Apartment washrooms and bathrooms shall not require 

per Section 3.5.  

sprinkler protection. 

H. LAUNDRY/
STORAGE 

I. PANTRIES 

J. STAGES 

i.  Laundry and storage rooms of residential buildings, residential apartment 

buildings and hotel apartment buildings shall be provided with sprinkler sys-
tem as per Section 3.5. 

i.  Pantries in business occupancies and commercial buildings shall be provided 

with a sprinkler system as per Section 3.5. 

i.  Permanent stages in assembly occupancies shall be installed with a sprinkler 
system under the stages, dressing rooms, store rooms and workshops, in ac-
cordance with Section 3.5. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 749 of 1348 

LOCATION/ 
HAZARD 

K. ROOF 

L. GARBAGE 

CHUTE 

M. CEILINGS 

EXCEEDING 
10 M IN 
HEIGHT 

Table 9.29.: Various Locations and Extension of Fire Protection Systems 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

i.  Building roofs having LPG tanks, roof spaces used for restaurant seating, assembly 
and as sheesha bars shall be provided with a wet riser System as per Section 3.4. 
The building wet riser with hose reel shall be extended to such roofs. 

i.  A garbage chute shaft shall be provided with one sprinkler head at the top of the 

shaft, one sprinkler head at alternating floors and one sprinkler head at the lowest 
level, as per  Section 3.5. 

i.  Where building ceiling height exceeds 10 m in height, sprinklers shall be provided 

in accordance with Section 3.5 and Table 9.29.A. High Ceiling Sprinkler Protec-
tion. 

ii.  The sprinklers for high ceiling protection shall be extended coverage, 1600F (700c), 

listed and approved for such applications. 

iii. The requirements of Table 9.29.A. High Ceiling Sprinkler Protection, is a minimum 
guideline. Other design criteria recommended by approved and listed manufactur-
er’s detailed design guideline specifically for high ceiling sprinkler protection shall 
be permitted. 

Table 9.29.A.: High Ceiling Sprinkler Protection Design Criteria 

HAZARD 

CEILING HEIGHT 
10 m TO 13.5 m 

CEILING HEIGHT 
13.5 m TO 18 m 

CEILING HEIGHT 
18 m TO 30 m 

1.  LIGHT HAZARD  K-factor- K11.2 (K160) 

 
Min Pressure                                  
12 psi (0.8 bar) 
 
Min No of Sprinklers- 06 
 
Design Density  
gpm/ft2  (mm/m2) 
0.20 (8.0) 
 
Design area ft2  (m2) 
2500 (230) 
 
Pump Capacity 
Without hydrant-750 gpm 
With hydrants-1000 gpm 

K-factor- K11.2 (K160) 
 
Min Pressure                              
18 psi (1.2 bar) 
 
Min No of Sprinklers 04 
 
Design Density  
gpm/ft2  (mm/m2) 
0.20 (8.0) 
 
Design area ft2  (m2) 
2500 (230) 
 
Pump Capacity 
Without hydrant-750 gpm 
With hydrants-1000 gpm 

K-factor- K25.2 (K360) 
 
Min Pressure                                
7 psi (0.5 bar) 
 
Min No of Sprinklers 12 
 
Pump Capacity 
Without hydrant-           
1000 gpm 
With hydrants-1250 gpm 

K-factor- K11.2 (K160) 
K-factor- K11.2 (K160) 
 
 
Min Pressure                             
Min Pressure                                
12 psi (0.8 bar) 
18 psi (1.2 bar) 
 
 
Min No of Sprinklers 06 
Min No of Sprinklers 04 
 
 
Design Density  
Design Density  
gpm/ft2  (mm/m2) 
gpm/ft2  (mm/m2) 
0.20 (8.0) 
0.20 (8.0) 
 
 
Design area ft2  (m2) 
Design area ft2  (m2) 
2500 (230) 
2500 (230) 
 
 
Pump Capacity 
Pump Capacity 
Without hydrant-750 gpm 
Without hydrant-750 gpm 
With hydrants-1000 gpm 
With hydrants-1000 gpm 

K-factor- K25.2 (K360) 
 
Min Pressure                                 
7 psi (0.5 bar) 
 
Min No of Sprinklers 12 
 
Pump Capacity 
Without hydrant-           
1000 gpm 
With hydrants-1250 gpm 

2.  ORDINARY 

HAZARD 

 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 750 of 1348 

Table 9.29.A.: High Ceiling Sprinkler Protection Design Criteria 

HAZARD 

CEILING HEIGHT 
10 m TO 13.5 m 

CEILING HEIGHT 
13.5 m TO 18 m 

CEILING HEIGHT 
18 m TO 30 m 

3.  HIGH HAZARD  K-factor- K11.2 (K160) 

K-factor- K25.2 (K360) 
 
Min Pressure                          
7 psi (0.5 bar) 
 
Min No of Sprinklers 12 
 
Pump Capacity 
Without hydrant-           
1000 gpm 
With hydrants-1250 gpm 

K-factor- K25.2 (K360) 
 
Min Pressure                          
7 psi (0.5 bar) 
 
Min No of Sprinklers 12 
 
Pump Capacity 
Without hydrant-           
1000 gpm 
With hydrants-1250 gpm 

 
Min Pressure                                
12 psi (0.8 bar) 
 
Min No of Sprinklers 06 
 
Design Density  
gpm/ft2  (mm/m2) 
0.30 (12.0) 
 
Design area ft2  (m2) 
3600 (340) 
 
Pump Capacity 
Without hydrant-           
1000 gpm 
With hydrants-1250 gpm 

 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 751 of 1348 

4.14.  Auxiliary Rooms and Selection of Fire Protection Systems 

 
4.14.1.  Auxiliary rooms shall be protected with the options of Fire Protection Systems as 
per Table 9.30.  However, where any rooms and equipment are provided with 
fire protection systems as per Table 9.30., the designers shall first consider and 
consult the relevant Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) before designing and 
proposing such fire protection systems. 

Table 9.30.: Auxiliary Rooms Fire Protection Systems 

LOCATION /  HAZARD 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

A. ANESTHETIZING ROOMS  

B. BATTERY CHARGER ROOMS 

C. BMS ROOMS 

OR 

OR 

OR 

OR 

D. BATTERY ROOMS 

i.  None 

E. COMPUTER ROOMS 

F. CONTROL ROOMS/ FIRE     

COMMAND CENTERS 

i.  An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided as per Section 

3.5.                                                                                                        
OR 

ii.  A double interlocked Pre-action sprinkler system shall be pro-

vided as per Section 3.7. 

i.  Clean agent system shall be provided as per Section 3.14.        

ii.  A double interlocked Pre-action sprinkler system shall be pro-

vided as per Section 3.7. 

i.  Clean agent system shall be provided as per Section 3.14.        

ii.  A double interlocked Pre-action sprinkler system shall be pro-

vided as per Section 3.7. 

iii. BMS rooms which are less than 10 m2  in area and are not with 
critical building monitoring and management systems shall not 
be required to be protected. 

i.  Clean agent system shall be provided as per Section 3.14.        

ii.  A double interlocked pre-action sprinkler system shall be pro-
vided as per Section 3.7.                                                                   
OR 

iii. Computer rooms which are less than 10 m2  in area and are not 

with critical life or building monitoring and management sys-
tems shall not be required to be protected. 

i.  Clean agent system shall be provided as per Section 3.14.        

ii.  A double interlocked Pre-action sprinkler system shall be pro-
vided as per Section 3.7.                                                                   
OR 

iii. Rooms which are less than 10 m2  in area and are not with criti-
cal life or building monitoring and control systems shall not be 
required to be protected. 

iv. Rooms which are separated as part of separated service blocks 

and detached from the predominant occupancy, by a separa-
tion distance of 3 m, shall not be required to be protected. 

G. DIESEL GENERATOR ROOMS 

i.  Foam sprinkler system shall be provided as per Section 3.9.  
ii.  Diesel generator rooms which are separated as part of separat-
ed service blocks and detached from the predominant occupan-
cy, by a separation distance of 3 m, shall not be required to be 
protected. 

 
 

 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 752 of 1348 

4.14.  Auxiliary Rooms and Selection of Fire Protection Systems 

Table 9.30.: Auxiliary Rooms Fire Protection Systems 

LOCATION /  HAZARD 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

H. MAIN ELECTRICAL ROOMS                     

i.  Clean agent system shall be provided as per Section 3.14.        
ii.  Electrical rooms which are less than 10 m2  in area OR are locat-
ed on typical floors shall not be required to be protected. How-
ever, such typical floor electrical rooms shall be 1 hour fire rat-
ed enclosures and shall be limited to distribution boards and  
junction boxes and fully compliant to penetration fire stopping. 

iii. Electrical rooms which are separated as part of separated ser-

vice blocks and detached from the predominant occupancy, by 
a separation distance of 3 m, shall not be required to be pro-
tected. 

I. AHU ROOMS 

i.  An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided as per Section 

3.5.  

i.  Clean agent system shall be provided as per Section 3.14. 

Where louvers are provided for LV rooms protected with clean 
agent system, louvers shall be motorized and closed upon clean 
agent discharge to maintain room tightness.                                

ii.  Rooms which are separated as part of separated service blocks 

and detached from the predominant occupancy, by a separa-
tion distance of 3 m, shall not be required to be protected. 

iii. Rooms which are less than 10 m2  in area OR are located on typ-
ical floors shall not be required to be protected. However, such 
typical floor or podium floor rooms shall be 1 hour fire rated 
enclosures and shall be limited to distribution boards and  junc-
tion boxes and fully compliant to penetration fire stopping. 

 

i.  None, unless power utility company specifies. 
ii.  Where specified and required, A clean agent system shall be 

provided as per Section 3.14.                                                           
OR 

iii. Deluge Water Spray system shall be provided in accordance 

with Section 3.8.                                                                                          
OR 

iv. Water Mist system shall be provided in accordance with Section 

3.10.  

OR 

i.  A clean agent system shall be provided as per Section 3.14.     

ii.  Deluge Water Spray system shall be provided in accordance 

with Section 3.8.                                                                                          
OR 

iii. Water Mist system shall be provided in accordance with Section 

3.10.                                                                                                       
OR  

iv. Transformer Rooms shall be 2 hour fire rated enclosures with 
90 minutes fire doors or 90 minutes fire rated motorized lou-
vers, housing exclusively dry type electrical equipment and no 
other storage. 

v.  Private enclosed transformer rooms which are separated as 
part of separated service blocks and detached from the pre-
dominant occupancy, by a separation distance of 3 m, shall not 
be required to be protected. 

J. LV ROOMS AND MV ROOMS 

K.  TRANSFORMER ROOMS 

OWNED BY POWER UTILITY 
COMPANIES, ENCLOSED AND 
SITUATED IN  LOCATIONS 
OTHER THAN  SUBSTATIONS 

L.  TRANSFORMER ROOMS NOT 
OWNED BY POWER UTILITY 
COMPANIES, ENCLOSED AND 
SITUATED IN  LOCATIONS 
OTHER THAN  SUBSTATIONS 

 
 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 753 of 1348 

4.14.  Auxiliary Rooms and Selection of Fire Protection Systems 

Table 9.30.: Auxiliary Rooms Fire Protection Systems 

LOCATION /  HAZARD 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

M. LIFT MACHINE ROOMS 

i.  An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided as per Section 

ii.  Lift machine rooms which do not contain control equipment, 
mechanical equipment or spaces which serve ‘machine room 
less elevators’ shall not be required to be protected. 

N. MAIN TELEPHONE  ROOM                                  

i.  Clean agent system shall be provided as per Section 3.14.        

O. MAIN SERVER ROOMS                

P. RMU /IDF/ MDF/ CDF/MMR 

ROOMS 

Q. GSM ROOMS 

 
 
 

 

3.5.  

OR 

 

 

ii.  Telephone rooms which are less than 10 m2  in area or are locat-
ed on typical floors shall not be required to be protected. How-
ever, such typical floor telephone rooms shall be limited to dis-
tribution boards and  junction boxes and fully compliant pene-
tration fire stopping. 

iii. Telephone rooms which are separated as part of separated ser-

vice blocks and detached from the predominant occupancy, by a 
separation distance of 3 m, shall not be required to be protect-
ed. 

i.  Clean agent system shall be provided as per Section 3.14. 
ii.  Server rooms which are less than 10 m2  in area or are located 

on typical floors shall not be required to be protected. However, 
such typical floor server rooms shall be compartmented with 
fully compliant penetration fire stopping systems. 

iii. Server cabinets which are exposed to occupied rooms shall not 

be required to be protected, provided the room is provided with 
automatic sprinkler system. 

iv. Server rooms which are separated as part of separated service 

blocks and detached from the predominant occupancy, by a 
separation distance of 3 m, shall not be required to be protect-
ed. 

i.  Clean agent system shall be provided as per Section 3.14.  
ii.  Rooms which are less than 10 m2  in area or are located on typi-
cal floors shall not be required to be protected. However, such 
typical floor rooms shall be compartmented with fully compliant 
fire stopping systems. 

iii. Rooms which are separated as part of separated service blocks 

and detached from the predominant occupancy, by a separation 
distance of 3 m, shall not be required to be protected. 

 

i.  Clean agent system shall be provided as per Section 3.14.  
ii.  Rooms which are less than 10 m2  in area or are located on typi-
cal floors shall not be required to be protected. However, such 
typical floor rooms shall be compartmented with fully compliant 
fire stopping systems. 

iii. Rooms which are separated as part of separated service blocks 

and detached from the predominant occupancy, by a separation 
distance of 3 m, shall not be required to be protected. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 754 of 1348 

4.14.  Auxiliary Rooms and Selection of Fire Protection Systems 

Table 9.30.: Auxiliary Rooms Fire Protection Systems 

LOCATION /  HAZARD 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

R. OPERATION THEATERS 

S. MRI/SCANNING ROOMS 

i.  A double interlocked pre-action sprinkler system shall be provid-

ed as per Section 3.7. 

     OR 
ii.  Rooms shall be 2 hour fire rated enclosures with 90 minutes fire 
doors, housing exclusively dry type medical and electrical equip-
ment and no other storage. 

i.  An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided as per                          

Section 3.5.                                                                                          
OR 

ii.  A double interlocked pre-action sprinkler system shall be provid-

ed as per  Section 3.7.                                                                        
OR 

iii. Rooms shall be 2 hour fire rated enclosures with 90 minutes fire 
doors, housing exclusively dry type medical and electrical equip-
ment and no other storage. 

T. RECORDS ROOM                                        

i.  An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided as per                     

Section 3.5.                                                                                          
OR 

ii.  A double interlocked pre-action sprinkler system shall be provid-

ed as per Section 3.7.                                                                         
OR 

iii. Clean agent system shall be provided as per Section 3.14.  

U. UPS Rooms                                              

i.  Clean agent system shall be provided as per Section 3.14.        

OR 

ii.  A double interlocked Pre-action sprinkler system shall be provid-

ed as per Section 3.7.                                                                         
OR 

iii. Rooms shall be 2 hour fire rated enclosures with 90 minutes fire 
doors, housing exclusively dry type battery, dry electrical equip-
ment and no other storage. 

i.  Dry type sprinklers or dry preaction system shall be provided. 
ii.  Rooms which are less than 20 m2  in area need not be protected. 
However, such rooms shall be compartmented with fully compli-
ant penetration fire stopping systems. 

iii. Modular type cold rooms which are exposed to occupied rooms 
shall not be required to be protected, provided the room is pro-
vided with automatic sprinkler system. 

iv. Rooms which are separated as part of separated service blocks 

and detached from the predominant occupancy, by a separation 
distance of 3 m, shall not be required to be protected. 

V. COLD/FREEZER ROOMS 

 
 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 755 of 1348 

4.15.  Equipment and Selection of Fire Protection Systems 

 
4.15.1.  The equipment and machinery shall be protected with options of Fire Protection 

Systems as per Table 9.31.   

Table 9.31.: Equipment Fire Protection Systems 

EQUIPMENT/     HAZARD 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

A. KITCHEN HOOD  

B. LPG TANKS 

i.  An automatic Wet Chemical system shall be provided as per Sec-

tion 3.12. for commercial kitchens having 3 or more burners. 

ii.  Grease filters shall be installed for the kitchen hood. 

i.  Where building is sprinklered, and LPG tanks are installed above-

ground or on roofs or podiums, an automatic Water Deluge Spray 
System shall be provided as per Section 3.8. 

ii.  Where building is not sprinklered and LPG tanks are installed 

aboveground or on roofs or podiums, a dry type deluge spray sys-
tem shall be provided with breeching inlet. 

iii. Where LPG tanks are installed aboveground, no protection shall 
be required, unless the proximity of such tanks is more than 6 m 
from any point of structure. 

C. FLAMMABLE  LIQUID TANKS 

i.  An automatic foam systems as appropriate as per Section 3.9., 

shall be provided. Refer to Chapter 13. Flammable Liquids. 

D. CABLE SPREAD  AREAS 

E. DIESEL GENERATOR ROOM 

i.  An automatic Water Deluge Spray System shall be provided as per 

Table 3.8.                                                                                                
OR 

ii.  An automatic Water Mist System shall be provided as per Table 

3.10.  

i.  Foam sprinkler system shall be provided as per Section 3.9. 
ii.  Diesel generator rooms which are separated as part of separated 
service blocks and detached from the predominant occupancy, by 
a separation distance of 3 m, shall not be required to be protect-
ed. 

F. BOILERS/BOILER ROOMS 

G. COOLING TOWERS 

i.  An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided as per Section 

3.5.  

i.  Where the cooling tower material is not tested and certified for 
non-combustibility, automatic Water Deluge Spray System shall 
be provided as per Table 3.8.  

H. TRANSFORMERS                              

i.  An automatic Water Deluge Spray System shall be provided as per 

Table 3.8.  

i.  Suppression Systems shall be based on comprehensive Risk as-

sessment and shall be proposed and stamped by the Civil Defence 
approved House of Expertise. Refer to Chapter 13. Flammable 
Liquids. 

i.  Suppression Systems shall be based on comprehensive Risk as-

sessment and shall be proposed and stamped by the Civil Defence 
approved House of Expertise. Refer to Chapter 13. Flammable 
Liquids and Chapter 9. Fire Protection Systems. 

—OIL FILLED 

I. BULK OIL STORAGE 

J. BULK  FLAMMABLE LIQUID  

STORAGE 

 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 756 of 1348 

Table 9.31.: Equipment Fire Protection Systems 

EQUIPMENT/     HAZARD 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

K. BULK FLAMMABLE GAS        

STORAGE 

i.  Suppression Systems shall be based on comprehensive Risk as-

sessment and shall be proposed and stamped by the Civil Defence 
approved House of Expertise. 

L. BULK FLAMMABLE SOLID 

STORAGE 

i.  Suppression Systems shall be based on a comprehensive Risk as-

sessment and shall be proposed and stamped by the Civil Defence 
approved House of Expertise. 

M. HIGH HAZARD LOGISTICS 

N. CHEMICAL  WAREHOUSES 

i.  Suppression Systems shall be based on a comprehensive Risk as-

sessment and shall be proposed and stamped by the Civil Defence 
approved House of Expertise. 

i.  Suppression Systems shall be based on a comprehensive Risk as-

sessment and shall be proposed and stamped by the Civil Defence 
approved House of Expertise. 

O. ARMS, AMMUNITION,              

EXPLOSIVES 

i.  Suppression Systems shall be based on a comprehensive Risk as-

sessment and shall be proposed and stamped by the Civil Defence 
approved House of Expertise. 

P. PROCESSING, GENERATING 

PLANTS 

 

i.  Suppression Systems shall be based on a comprehensive Risk as-

sessment and shall be proposed and stamped by the Civil Defence 
approved House of Expertise. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 757 of 1348 

5.  Design, Installation, Inspection and Maintenance of Fire 

Protection Systems 
 
5.1. Design/Specification and Submittals 
 

5.1.1.  Design, Specifications and Submittals to Civil Defence for approval shall be the 

main consultant’s responsibility. The consultant shall have competent and knowl-
edgeable personnel to understand the Civil Defence requirements and codes and 
standards. 

5.1.2. 

The design submittals shall be complete with system hydraulic calculations, design 
criteria, appropriate selection of types of systems and their components, in com-
pliance with this code. 

5.2. Installation 
 

5.2.1. 

5.2.2. 

5.2.3. 

The installation of Fire Protection Systems shall be carried out only by Civil Defence 
approved and licensed contractors. general contractors, MEP contractors and 
plumbing contractors shall not be allowed to install fire protection systems. 

The qualification and approval of the installation by Civil Defence is based on their 
training from the respective system manufacturers, their experience and their un-
derstanding of codes and standards and workmanship. 

Installation contractors shall apply to Civil Defence and secure passing marks in 
Civil Defence examination to gain the license and be qualified as “approved fire 
contractors”. 

5.2.4. 

The installation contractor shall not commence work on site without receiving the 
Civil Defence stamped and approved drawings from the Consultant. 

5.2.5. 

It is the contractors responsibility to adhere to consultant’s Civil Defence approved 
drawings and specifications. 

5.3. Inspection and Acceptance 
 

5.3.1. 

Inspection and acceptance shall be the main consultant’s responsibility. 

5.3.2. 

The main consultant shall inspect the contractor’s work during installations and 
ensure that all systems are installed, tested, commissioned and performing as per 
the Civil Defence approved drawings and their intended purpose. 

5.3.3. 

The consultant shall handover the system inspection and acceptance reports and 
the maintenance manuals to the owner. 

5.4. Inspection and Maintenance 
 

5.4.1. 

The building owner, his appointed representative and the facility management 

shall be responsible to ensure that all the Fire Protection Systems in the facility are 

inspected regularly, maintained and repaired to serve their intended purpose dur-

ing emergencies. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 758 of 1348 

5.5. Fire Pumps-acceptance test and maintenance 
 

Fire Pumps shall be inspected and maintained as per minimum guidelines in ac-
cordance with Table 9.32. However, detailed acceptance, inspection tests and 
maintenance shall be as per Manufacturer’s instruction manual, NFPA 20 and 
NFPA 25. 

5.5.1. 

 

Table 9.32.: Fire Pump  Testing, Inspection and Maintenance 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. ACCEPTANCE TEST  1.  FLUSHING 

 
i.  The suction piping shall be flushed prior to hydrostatic tests. 
ii.  Where the maximum flow available from the water supply cannot provide a 

flow of 150 percent of the rated flow of the pump, the flushing flow rate 
shall be the greater of 100 percent of the rated flow of the connected fire 
pump or the maximum flow demand of the fire protection system. 

 
2.  HYDROSTATIC TEST 
 
i.  Suction and discharge piping shall be hydrostatically tested at not less than 
200 psi (13.8 bar) pressure or at 50 psi (3.4 bar) in excess of the maximum 
pressure to be maintained in the system, whichever is greater. 

ii.  The pressure shall be maintained for 2 hours. 
iii. The installing contractor shall furnish a certificate for flushing and hydro-

static test prior to the start of the fire pump field acceptance test. 

 
3.  FIELD ACCEPTANCE TEST 
 
i. 

All electric wiring to the fire pump motor(s), including control (multiple 
pumps) interwiring, normal power supply, alternate power supply, and 
jockey pump, shall be completed and checked by the electrical contractor 
prior to the initial startup and acceptance test. 

ii.  A copy of the manufacturer's certified pump test curve shall be available 

for comparison with the results of the field acceptance test. 

iii.  The test procedures as per the manufacturer’s manual shall be followed 

and their results shall be verified. 

iv.  The actual unadjusted fire pump discharge flows and pressures installed 

v. 

shall meet or exceed the fire protection system's demand. 
The fire pump shall perform at minimum, rated, and peak loads without an 
objectionable overheating of any component. 

vi.  Vibrations of the fire pump assembly shall not be of a magnitude to pose 

potential damage to any fire pump component. 

vii.  Where simultaneous operation of multiple pumps is required as part of a 
system design, the acceptance test shall include a flow test of all pumps 
operating simultaneously. 

viii.  The maximum flow available shall be 150% of the rated flow of the pump. 
ix.  For electric motors operating at a rated voltage and frequency, the ampere 

demand on each phase shall not exceed the product of the full-load am-
pere rating times the allowable service factor as stamped on the motor 
nameplate. 

x.  The voltage at the motor contactor ouput lugs shall not vary more than 5% 

below or 10% above rated (nameplate) voltage during the test  

xi.  The fire pump or foam concentrate pump shall be in operation for not less 

than 1 hour. 

xii.  Consultant shall hand over one set of stamped record drawings and one 

copy of the completed test report to the building owner. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 759 of 1348 

 

Table 9.32.: Fire Pump  Testing, Inspection and Maintenance 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

2. WEEKLY     

INSPECTION 

1. VISUAL OBSERVATION 
 
i.  Piping is free of leakage. 
ii.  Pressure gauges reading are satisfactory. 
iii.  The controller pilot light is illuminated to ensure power is on. 
iv.  The transfer switch normal pilot light is illuminated. 
v.  The pump suction and discharge and bypass valves are fully open 
vi.  The suction line pressure gauge reading is within acceptable range. 
vii.  The system line pressure gauge reading is within acceptable range. 
viii. The suction reservoir has the required water level. 
ix.  The wet pit suction screens are unobstructed and in place. 
x.  The waterflow test valves are in the closed position. 
xi.  The ventilating louvers at the pump room are free to operate. 
xii.  The reverse phase alarm pilot light is off/the normal phase rotation pilot light is 

on. 

xiii.  The oil level in the vertical motor sight glass is within acceptable range. 
xiv.  The power to pressure maintenance (jockey) pump is provided. 
xv.  The diesel engine fuel tank is at least two-thirds full. 
xvi.  The diesel engine controller selector switch is in auto position. 
xvii.  The diesel engine batteries’ voltage readings are within acceptable range. 
xviii. All alarm pilot lights are off. 
xix.  The diesel Engine running time meter is reading. 
xx.  The oil level in the right angle gear drive is within acceptable range. 
xxi.  The crankcase oil level is within acceptable range. 
xxii.  The cooling water level is within acceptable range. 
xxiii. The electrolyte level in batteries is within acceptable range. 
xxiv. Battery terminals are free from corrosion. 

3. WEEKLY 

TESTS 

1. GENERAL 
 
i.  A non-flow test shall be conducted for electric motor-driven pump and diesel en-

gine-driven fire pumps without recirculating water back to the pump suction. 

ii.  The test shall be conducted by starting the pump automatically. 
iii.  The electric pump shall run a minimum of 10 minutes. 
iv.  The diesel pump shall run a minimum of 30 minutes  
 
2. FOLLOWING OBSERVATION RECORDS AND MAINTENANCE ADJUSTMENTS SHALL 

BE CARRIED OUT WHILE PUMP IS RUNNING 

 
i.  Record the pump starting pressure from the pressure switch /pressure  transduc-

ii.  Record the system suction and discharge pressure gauge readings. 
iii.  Inspect the pump packing glands for slight discharge, adjust gland nuts if neces-

er. 

sary 

iv.  Inspect for unusual noise or vibration. 
v. 
vi.  Record pressure switch or pressure transducer reading and compare to the pump 

Inspect packing boxes, bearings, or pump casing for overheating 

discharge gauge. 

vii.  For pumps that use electronic pressure sensors to control the fire pump opera-

tion, record the current pressure and the highest and the lowest pressure shown 
on the fire pump controller event log. 

viii. For electric motor and radiator cooled diesel pumps, check the circulation relief 

valve for operation to discharge water. 

ix.  Observe the time for motor to accelerate to full speed. 
x.  Record the time controller is on first step (for reduced voltage or reduced current 

starting) 

xi.  Record the time pump runs after starting (for automatic stop controllers) 
xii.  Observe the time for diesel engine to crank. 
xiii. Observe the time for diesel engine to reach running speed 
xiv. Observe the engine oil pressure gauge, speed indicator, water and oil temperature 

indicators periodically while the engine is running 

xv.  Record any abnormalities and initiate repair or maintenance or parts replacement 

through Civil Defence approved fire contractor. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 760 of 1348personnel, for no flow (churn), rated flow and 150% of pump rated flow along with 
water discharge through hose and other approved test devices. 

ii.  Any parts that needs to be repaired or replaced shall be handled through Civil De-

fence approved fire contractor. 

 

 

Table 9.32.: Fire Pump  Testing, Inspection and Maintenance 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

i.  Annually, each pump set shall be tested by qualified and Civil Defence approved 

4. ANNUAL 
TESTING 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 761 of 1348 

5.6. Standpipe and Hose Systems (Dry/Wet Risers) - acceptance 

test and maintenance 

 

5.6.1. 

Standpipe and Hose Systems shall be inspected and maintained as per minimum 
guidelines in accordance with Table 9.33. However, detailed acceptance, inspec-
tion tests and maintenance shall be as per NFPA 14 and NFPA 25. 

Table 9.33.: Standpipe (Dry and Wet Riser) Testing, Inspection and Maintenance 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  FLUSHING 
 
i.  The underground Piping shall be flushed. 
ii.  The piping between the fire department connection and the check valve in the in-
let pipe shall be flushed with a sufficient volume of water in order to remove any 
construction debris and trash accumulated in the piping prior to the completion of 
the system and prior to the installation of the Civil Defence connection. 

iii.  The minimum flow rate shall not be less than the hydraulically calculated water 

demand flow rate of the system plus hose demands. 

 
2.  HYDROSTATIC TEST 
 
i.  All new systems, including the yard piping and fire department connections, shall 

be tested hydrostatically at not less than 13.8 bar (200 psi) of pressure for 2 hours, 
or at 3.5 bar (50 psi) in excess of the maximum pressure where the maximum pres-
sure is in excess of 10.3 bar (150 psi). Pressure shall be maintained for 2 hours. 

ii.  The inside standpipe system piping shall show no leakage. 
iii.  Any leakage that results in a loss of pressure in excess of 0.1 bar (1½ psi) during a 

continuous 24-hour period shall be corrected. 

iv. The installing contractor shall furnish a certificate for flushing and hydrostatic test 

prior to the start of the fire pump and field acceptance test. 

v.  Hose connections and Civil Defence breeching inlet connections shall be tested for 
compatibility. (All UAE Civil Defence connections are instantaneous coupling type). 

vi.  The piping between the fire department connection and the check valve in the in-

let pipe shall be tested hydrostatically in the same manner. 

vii.During the hydrostatic test, the pressure gauge at the top of each standpipe shall 

be observed and the pressure recorded.  

 
3.  FIELD ACCEPTANCE TEST 
 
i.  Testing shall be conducted while fire pumps are running for wet riser systems. 
ii.  The water supply shall be tested to verify compliance with the design. This test 

shall be conducted by flowing water from the hydraulically most remote hose con-
nections. 

iii. For a Dry Riser standpipe, a fire department pumper or portable pump of a capaci-
ty to provide required flow and pressure shall be used to verify the system design 
by pumping into the fire department connection. 

iv. A flow test shall be conducted at each roof outlet to verify that the required pres-

sure is available at the required flow. 

v.  The maximum flow to be demonstrated from a single hose connection shall be 946 

L/min (250 gpm) for a 65-mm (2½-in.) connection and (379 L/min) 100 gpm for a 
40-mm (1½-in.) connection and 50 gpm for a 25 mm connection. 

vi. The filling arrangement for suction tanks shall be verified by shutting down all sup-

plies to the tank, draining the tank to below the designated low water level, and 
then opening the supply valve to ensure operation of its automatic features. 

vii. Each pressure-regulating device shall be tested to verify that the installation is cor-
rect, that the device is operating properly, and that the inlet and outlet pressures 
at the device are in accordance with the design. 

viii.Signs, both in English and Arabic shall be verified on site. 
ix. The consultant shall hand over one set of stamped record drawings and one copy 

of the completed test report to the building owner. 

1. ACCEPTANCE 

TEST 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 762 of 1348 

 

Table 9.33.: Standpipe (Dry and Wet Riser) Testing, Inspection and Maintenance 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

2. WEEKLY INSPECTION  VISUAL OBSERVATION 

 
i.  The piping is free of leakage. 
ii.  Pressure gauges are in good condition and reading are satisfactory. 
iii.  The hose cabinet is in good condition and contains equipment, nozzle, 

hose and hose outlets as per design (Class I, II or III). 

iv.  The landing valve and Hose outlets’ caps are in good condition and in 

place. 

v.  There are no obstructions to the Fire Hose Cabinet. 
vi.  Control valves, Valve handles and supervisory devices are not damaged 

and in good condition. 

i.  Hose connection caps shall be replaced where missing or damaged. 
ii.  Valves shall be lubricated to ensure their smooth operation. 
iii.  Hose, gaskets, nozzles shall be inspected for damage by removing from 

the cabinet and rereeled back into racks or stands. 

iv.  The hose shall always be connected to hose outlet valve. 
v.  Repair any leakages in the piping, valves and joints. 
vi.  Lubricate hose cabinet doors and replace them if corroded. 
vii.  Fire extinguishers in the cabinet shall be in a good working condition with 

satisfactory pressure readings. 

viii. Pumps and controllers of the system shall be tested, maintained as per           

Table 9.31. 

i.  A flow test shall be conducted every year on all standpipe systems to veri-

fy that the required flow and pressure are available at the hydraulically 
most remote  hose valve outlet(s) while flowing the standpipe system de-
mand. 

ii.  The standpipe system demand shall include 500 gpm (1892 L/min) for the 

first standpipe and 250 gpm (946 L/min) for each additional standpipe 
until the total system demand is simultaneously flowing. 

iii.  The 250 gpm (946 L/min) required from each additional standpipe shall 

be allowed to be flowed from the most convenient hose valve on that 
standpipe. 

iv.  A main drain test shall be performed on all standpipe systems. 
v.  Pressure and flow gauges shall be replaced every 5 years. 
vi.  Any parts that need to be repaired or replaced shall be handled through 

Civil Defence approved fire contractor. 

3. MAINTENANCE 

4. ANNUAL TESTING 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 763 of 1348 

5.7. Sprinkler and Deluge Systems - acceptance test and mainte-

nance 

 

5.7.1.  Automatic Sprinkler and Deluge Systems shall be inspected and maintained as per 
minimum guidelines in accordance with Table 9.34. However, detailed acceptance, 
inspection tests and maintenance shall be as per NFPA 13, NFPA 15 and NFPA 25. 

Table 9.34.: Sprinkler and Deluge Testing, Inspection and Maintenance 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  FLUSHING 
 
i.  The underground Piping shall be flushed. 
ii.  The piping between the fire department connection and the check valve in the in-
let pipe shall be flushed with a sufficient volume of water in order to remove any 
construction debris and trash accumulated in the piping prior to the completion of 
the system and prior to the installation of the Civil Defence connection. 

iii.  The minimum flow rate shall not be less than the hydraulically calculated water 

demand flow rate of the system plus hose demands. 

 
2.  HYDROSTATIC TEST 
 
i.  The piping network shall be tested hydrostatically at not less than 13.8 bar (200 
psi) of pressure for 2 hours, or at 3.5 bar (50 psi) in excess of the maximum pres-
sure where the maximum pressure is in excess of 10.3 bar (150 psi). The pressure 
shall be maintained for 2 hours. 

ii.  When deluge systems are being hydrostatically tested, plugs shall be installed in 
fittings and replaced with open sprinklers after the test is completed, or the oper-
ating elements of automatic sprinklers shall be removed after the test is complet-
ed. 

iii. For pre-action systems, in addition to the standard hydrostatic test, an air pres-
sure leakage test at 40 psi (2.7 bar) shall be conducted for 24 hours. Any leakage 
that results in a loss of pressure in excess of 11⁄2 psi (0.1 bar) for the 24 hours shall 
be corrected. 

iv. The piping, joints and discharge devices shall show no leakage. 
v.  Any leakage that results in a loss of pressure in excess of 0.1 bar (1½ psi) during a 

continuous 24-hour period shall be corrected. 

1. ACCEPTANCE 

TEST 

 

vi. The installing contractor shall furnish a certificate for flushing and hydrostatic test 

prior to the start of the fire pump and field acceptance test. 

vii.Hose connections and Civil Defence breeching inlet connections shall be tested for 
compatibility. (All UAE Civil Defence connections are instantaneous coupling type). 
viii. The piping between the breeching inlet connection and the check valve in the inlet 

pipe shall be tested hydrostatically in the same manner. 

 
3.  FIELD ACCEPTANCE TEST 
 
i.  The waterflow detecting devices including the associated alarm circuits shall be 

flow tested through the inspector’s test connection and shall result in an audible 
alarm on the premises within 5 minutes after such flow begins and until such flow 
stops.  

ii.  Testing shall be conducted while fire pumps are running for wet riser systems. 
iii. At least one remote sprinkler head shall be burst open with a heating device and 
associated system functions such as the alarm gong operation, fire pump opera-
tion, flow switch operation etc. shall be tested and verified. 

iv. The automatic operation of a deluge or pre-action valve shall be tested in accord-

ance with the manufacturer’s instructions. 

v.  Each pressure-regulating device shall be tested to verify that the installation is cor-
rect, that the device is operating properly, and that the inlet and outlet pressures 
at the device are in accordance with the design. 

vi. All control valves shall be fully closed and opened under system water pressure to 

ensure proper operation. 

vii. Signs, both in English and Arabic shall be verified on site. 
viii.The consultant shall hand over one set of stamped record drawings and one copy 

of the completed test report to the building owner. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 764 of 1348 

 

Table 9.34.: Sprinkler and Deluge Testing, Inspection and Maintenance 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

2. QUARTERLY            

INSPECTION 

i.  Sprinklers shall not show signs of leakage. They shall be free of corrosion, 
foreign materials, paint, and physical damage and shall be installed in the 
correct orientation (e.g., upright, pendent, or sidewall). 

ii.  Escutcheons and coverplates for recessed, flush, and concealed sprinklers 

shall be replaced if found missing during the inspection. 

iii. A minimum clearance from a sprinkler deflector and the top of storage shall 

be more than 1 m. 

dition. 

iv. Availability of correct type of spare sprinklers shall be verified. 
v.  Pressure and flow gauges shall be free of damage and in good working con-

vi. Waterflow alarm and supervisory signal initiating devices shall be inspected 

quarterly to verify that they are free of physical damages. 

vii.The hydraulic design information sign shall be inspected quarterly to verify 

that it is provided, attached securely to the sprinkler riser, and is legible. 

3. QUARTERLY TEST 

i.  Systems shall be tested quarterly as per FIELD ACCEPTANCE TEST as required 

by Table 9.33.1., by the Civil Defence approved maintenance contractor. 

i.  Valves shall be lubricated to ensure smooth operation. 
ii.  Pressure, flow gauges, supervisory signal devices and water flow devices 

shall be verified for good working condition. 

iii.  Detection system for deluge and pre-action systems shall be verified for 

good working condition. 

iv.  Leaking, damaged and corroded parts shall be replaced. 
v.  Pumps and controllers of the system shall be tested, maintained as per           

Table 9.31. 

4. MAINTENANCE 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 765 of 1348 

5.8. Foam Systems - acceptance test and maintenance 
 

5.8.1. 

Foam Systems shall be inspected and maintained as per minimum guidelines in 
accordance with Table 9.35. However, detailed acceptance, inspection tests and 
maintenance shall be as per NFPA 13, NFPA 11, NFPA 16 and NFPA 25. 

 

Table 9.35.: Foam Systems Testing, Inspection and Maintenance 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  FLUSHING 
 
i.  Water supply mains shall be flushed before connecting to system piping. 
ii.  The minimum flow rate shall not be less than the hydraulically calculated water 

demand flow rate of the system plus hose demands. 

 
2.  HYDROSTATIC TEST 
 
i.  The piping network shall be tested hydrostatically at not less than 13.8 bar (200 
psi) of pressure for 2 hours, or at 3.5 bar (50 psi) in excess of the maximum pres-
sure where the maximum pressure is in excess of 10.3 bar (150 psi). Pressure 
shall be maintained for 2 hours. 

ii.  The piping, joints and discharge devices shall show no leakage. 
iii.  Any leakage that results in a loss of pressure in excess of 0.1 bar (1½ psi) during a 

continuous 24-hour period shall be corrected. 

iv. The installing contractor shall furnish a certificate for flushing and hydrostatic 

test prior to the start of the fire pump and field acceptance test. 

v.  Hose connections and Civil Defence breeching inlet connections shall be tested 
for compatibility. (All UAE Civil Defence connections are instantaneous coupling 
type). 

vi.  The piping between the fire department connection and the check valve in the 

inlet pipe shall be tested hydrostatically in the same manner. 

 
3.  FIELD ACCEPTANCE TEST 
 
i.  The tests for total flooding systems shall establish that all automatic closing de-
vices for doors, windows, and conveyor openings, and automatic equipment in-
terlocks, as well as automatic opening of heat and smoke vents or ventilators, 
will function upon system operation. 

ii.  Deluge and pre-action and sprinkler systems shall be tested as per Table 9.33. 
iii.  The foam quality (expansion and one-quarter drain time) or foam discharge shall 
be conducted, or the foam discharge shall be visually inspected to ensure that it 
is satisfactory for the purpose intended. 

iv.  The foam proportion shall not be less than rated concentration. 
v.  Where conditions permit, flow tests shall be conducted to ensure that the haz-

ard is fully protected in conformance with the design specification 

vi. Waterflow detecting devices including the associated alarm circuits shall be flow 

tested through the inspector’s test connection and shall result in an audible 
alarm on the premises within 5 minutes after such flow begins and until such 
flow stops  

vii. Testing shall be conducted while fire pumps are running. 
viii.For Foam sprinkler systems, at least one remote sprinkler head shall be burst 
open with heating device and associated system functions such as alarm gong 
operation, fire pump operation, flow switch operation etc. shall be tested and 
verified. 

ix. The automatic operation of a deluge or pre-action valve shall be tested in ac-

cordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. 

x.  All control valves shall be fully closed and opened under the system water pres-

sure to ensure proper operation. 

xi. Signs, both in English and Arabic shall be verified on site. 
xii. The consultant shall hand over one set of stamped record drawings and one copy 

of the completed test report to the building owner. 

1. ACCEPTANCE 

TEST 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 766 of 1348 

 

Table 9.35.: Foam Systems Testing, Inspection and Maintenance 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

2. QUARTERLY            

INSPECTION 

i.  At least annually, an inspection shall be made of foam concentrates and their 

tanks or storage containers for evidence of excessive sludging or deteriora-
tion. 

ii.  The foam solution sample shall be annually tested at a laboratory to ensure 

the foam concentrate quality. 

iii. The proportioning system shall be inspected for good working condition. 
iv. The sight glass where provided on bladder tanks shall be cleaned. 
v.  The piping shall not show signs of leakage 
vi. Pressure and flow gauges shall be free of damage and in good working con-

vii. The position (open or closed) of valves shall be verified in accordance with 

specified operating conditions. 

viii.Strainers shall be periodically inspected and shall be cleaned after each use 

dition. 

and flow test.  

3. ANNUAL TEST 

i. 

ix. The waterflow alarm and supervisory signal initiating devices shall be in-

spected quarterly to verify that they are free of physical damage. 

x.  The hydraulic design information sign shall be inspected quarterly to verify 

that it is provided, attached securely to the sprinkler riser, and is legible. 

Systems shall be tested annually as per FIELD ACCEPTANCE TEST as re-
quired by Table 9.34.1., and this table, by the Civil Defence approved 
maintenance contractor. 

ii.  The foam concentrate pump shall be tested as per the manufacturers speci-

fications and manual. 

i.  Valves shall be lubricated to ensure their smooth operation. 
ii.  Pressure, flow gauges, supervisory signal devices and water flow devices 

shall be verified for good working condition. 

iii.  The detection system for deluge and pre-action systems shall be verified for 

good working condition. 

iv.  Leaking, damaged and corroded parts shall be replaced. 
v.  Pumps and controllers of the system shall be tested and maintained as per           

Table 9.32. 

4. MAINTENANCE 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 767 of 1348 

5.9. Clean Agent Systems - acceptance test and maintenance 
 

5.9.1. 

Clean Agent Systems shall be inspected and maintained as per the minimum guide-
lines in accordance with Table 9.36. However, detailed acceptance, inspection 
tests and maintenance shall be as per NFPA 2001, and Manufacturer’s guidelines. 

 

Table 9.36.: Clean Agent Systems Testing, Inspection and Maintenance 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

i.  The completed system shall be reviewed and tested by qualified personnel to 

meet the approval of Civil Defence. Only listed equipment and devices shall 
be used in the systems. To determine that the system has been properly in-
stalled and will function as specified, following inspection tests shall be per-
formed. 

ii.  The piping distribution system shall be inspected to determine that it is in 

compliance with the design and installation documents. 

iii. Nozzles and pipe size shall be in accordance with system drawings. Means of 

pipe size reduction and attitudes of tees shall be checked for their conform-
ance to the design. 

iv.  Piping joints, discharge nozzles, and piping supports shall be securely fas-

tened to prevent unacceptable vertical or lateral movement during dis-
charge. Discharge nozzles shall be installed in such a manner that piping can-
not become detached during discharge. 

v.  During assembly, the piping distribution system shall be inspected internally 

to detect the possibility of any oil or particulate matter soiling the hazard 
area or affecting the agent distribution due to a reduction in the effective 
nozzle orifice area. 

vi. The discharge nozzle shall be oriented in such a manner that an optimum 

agent dispersal can be effected. 

vii. If nozzle deflectors are installed, they shall be positioned to obtain the maxi-

mum benefit. 

viii.The discharge nozzles, piping, and mounting brackets shall be installed in 

such a manner that they will not potentially cause injury to personnel. Agent 
shall not directly impinge on areas where personnel could be found in the 
normal work area. The agent shall not directly impinge on any loose objects 
or shelves, cabinet tops, or similar surfaces where loose objects could be 
present and become missiles. 

ix. All agent storage containers shall be properly located in accordance with an 

approved set of system drawings. 

x.  All containers and mounting brackets shall be fastened securely in accord-

ance with the manufacturer’s requirements. 

xi. All total flooding systems shall have the enclosure examined and tested to 

locate and then effectively seal any significant air leaks that could result in a 
failure of the enclosure to hold the specified agent concentration level for 
the specified holding period. The currently preferred method is using a blow-
er door fan unit and smoke pencil. Quantitative results shall be obtained and 
recorded to indicate that the specified agent concentration for the specified 
duration of protection is in compliance with the consultant’s approved de-
signs.  

xii. The power shall be supplied to the control unit from a separate dedicated 

source that will not be shut down on system operation. 

xiii.Adequate and reliable primary and 24-hour minimum standby sources of 

energy shall be used to provide for operation of the detection, signaling, con-
trol, and actuation requirements of the system. 

xiv.The piping shall be pneumatically tested in a closed circuit for a period of 10 

minutes at 40 psig (276 kPa). At the end of 10 minutes, the pressure drop 
shall not exceed 20 percent of the test pressure. 

xv. A flow test using nitrogen or an inert gas shall be performed on the piping 

network to verify that flow is continuous and that the piping and nozzles are 
unobstructed. 

1. ACCEPTANCE TEST/ 

INSPECTIONS 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 768 of 1348 

 

Table 9.36.: Clean Agent Systems Testing, Inspection and Maintenance 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

2. FUNCTIONAL TESTS  i.  Disable each agent storage container release mechanism so that activation 

of the release circuit will not release the agent. Reconnect the release circuit 
with a functional device in lieu of each agent storage container release 
mechanism. For electrically actuated release mechanisms, these devices can 
include 24-V lamps, flashbulbs, or circuit breakers. Pneumatically actuated 
release mechanisms can include pressure gauges. Refer to the manufactur-
er’s recommendations in all cases. 

ii.  Operate detection initiating circuit(s). Verify that all alarm functions occur 

according to the design specifications. 

iii. Operate the necessary circuit to initiate a second alarm circuit if present. 
Verify that all second alarm functions occur according to design specifica-
tions. 

iv.  Operate manual release. Verify that manual release functions occur accord-

ing to design specifications. 

v.  Operate the abort switch circuit if supplied. Verify that abort functions occur 

according  to the design specifications. Confirm that visual and audible su-
pervisory signals are received at the control panel. 

vi. Test all automatic valves unless testing the valve will release agent or dam-

age the valve (destructive testing). 

vii. Check pneumatic equipment, where required, for integrity to ensure proper 

operation. 

viii.When all predischarge work is completed, each agent storage container shall 
be reconnected so that activation of the release circuit will release the agent. 
The system shall be returned to its fully operational design condition. 

3. MAINTENANCE 

 

i.  For halocarbon clean agents, if a container shows a loss in agent quantity of 
more than 5 percent or a loss in pressure (adjusted for temperature) of more 
than 10 percent, it shall be refilled or replaced. 

ii.  For inert gas clean agents that are not liquefied, pressure is an indication of 
agent quantity. If an inert gas clean agent container shows a loss in pressure 
(adjusted for temperature) of more than 5 percent, it shall be refilled or re-
placed. Where container pressure gauges are used for this purpose, they 
shall be compared to a separate calibrated device at least annually. 

iii. Where the amount of agent in the container is determined by special meas-

uring devices, these devices shall be listed. 

iv.  All halocarbon clean agent removed from refillable containers during service 
or maintenance procedures shall be collected and recycled or disposed of in 
an environmentally sound manner and in accordance with existing laws and 
regulations. 

v.  Factory-charged and nonrefillable containers that do not have a means of 

pressure indication shall have the agent quantity checked at least semiannu-
ally. If a container shows a loss in agent quantity of more than 5 percent, it 
shall be replaced. All factory-charged and nonrefillable containers removed 
from useful service shall be returned for recycling of the agent or disposed of 
in an environmentally sound manner and in accordance with existing laws 
and regulations and certification body and manufacturer’s guidelines and 
warnings. 

vi. For halocarbon clean agents, the date of inspection, gross weight of cylinder 
plus agent or net weight of agent, the type of agent, the person performing 
the inspection, and, where applicable, the pressure at a recorded tempera-
ture shall be recorded on a tag attached to the container. For inert gas clean 
agents, the date of inspection, the type of agent, the person performing the 
inspection, and the pressure at a recorded temperature shall be recorded on 
a tag attached to the container. 

vii. Cylinders continuously in service without discharging shall be given a com-

plete external visual inspection every 5 years or more frequently if required. 
The visual inspection shall be in accordance with Section 3 of CGA C-6, 
Standard for Visual Inspection of Steel Compressed Gas Cylinders, except 
that the cylinders not needed to be emptied or stamped while under pres-
sure. Inspections shall be made only by competent personnel, approved by 
Civil Defence, and the reports shall be furnished to the owner. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 769 of 1348 

6. Material Test Standards, Approval and registration. 

 
6.1. Acceptable Test Standards and criteria 

 
6.1.1.  All the Valves, Pumps, Piping, Hose, Nozzles, Devices, Sprinklers, Motors, Materials, 
Systems, Assemblies, equipment, Products and Accessories, referred to in this chap-
ter with respect to Life Safety, Fire Safety and Emergency Services shall be Listed, 
Approved and Registered by the Civil Defence Material Approval Department. 

 
6.1.2.  There is no year of edition mentioned against any test standards. It is the intent of 

Civil Defence to invite the customers seeking laboratory tests and the test labora-
tories to follow the “LATEST EDITION OF THE TEST STANDARD, AS AND WHEN 
THEY ARE UPGRADED/REVISED/AMENDED, TO THE DATE” 

 
6.1.3.  Fire Pump., Tested successfully at 150% of the rated flow. 
 

i. 
UL 448, Standard for Centrifugal Stationary Pumps for Fire-Protection Service. 
ii.  UL 448B, Standard for residential Fire Pumps intended for one and two family 

dwellings and manufactured homes. 

iii.  UL 448C, Standard for Stationary, Rotary type, positive displacement pumps 

for Fire Protection Service. 

iv.  FM 1319, Approval Standard for Centrifugal Fire Pumps (Horizontal, End Suc-

v. 

tion Type) 
FM 1370, Approval Standard for Centrifugal Fire Pumps (Vertical Shaft, Turbine 
Type, Barrel). 

vi.  FM 1313, Approval Standard for Positive Displacement Fire Pumps (Rotary 

Gear Type) 

vii.  FM 1312, Approval Standard for Centrifugal Fire Pumps (Vertical Shaft, Turbine 

Type). 

viii.  UL 162A, Fixed water motor coupled pumps for foam concentrate proportion-

ing. 

ix.  LPS 1131, Requirements and testing methods for pumps for automatic sprin-

x. 

kler installation pump sets. 
EN 12259-12, Fixed fire fighting systems — Components for sprinkler and wa-
ter spray systems — Part 12: Pumps 

xi.  LPS 1240, Requirements for LPCB approved fire sprinkler pump sets used in 

automatic sprinkler installations 

 

6.1.4.  Fire Pump Motor 
 

i. 

UL 1004-5, Standard for Fire Pump Motor. 

 
6.1.5.  Diesel Engine 
 

UL 1247, Standard for Diesel Engines for Driving Stationary Fire Pumps. 
FM 1333, Diesel Engine Fire Pump Drivers 

i. 
ii. 
iii.  LPS 1239, Requirements and testing procedures for the LPCB approval and 

listing of diesel engines for sprinkler pump sets  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 770 of 1348 

 

6.1.6.  Fire Pump Controller. 
 

i. 
ii. 

UL 218, Standard for Fire Pump Controller. 
FM 1321/1323, Standard for Fire Pump Controller for Electric Motor and Diesel 
Engine Driven Fire Pumps. 

iii.  LPS 1236, Requirements for control panels for diesel engine driven pumps 

used in automatic sprinkler installations. 

iv.  LPS 1237, Requirements for control panels for electric motor driven pumps 

used in automatic sprinkler installations  

 
6.1.7.  Sprinkler 
 

UL 199, Standard for Automatic Sprinklers for Fire Protection Service. 

i. 
ii.  UL 199J, Standard for Automatic Window Sprinklers for Fire Protection Service. 
iii.  UL 1626, Standard for Residential Sprinklers for Fire Protection Service. 
iv.  UL 1767, Standard for (ESFR) Early-Suppression Fast-Response Sprinklers. 
v.  UL 1767B, Standard for Specific application (ESFR) Pendent Sprinklers. 
vi.  FM 2000, Automatic Control Mode Sprinklers for fire protection. 
vii.  FM 2030, Residential Automatic Sprinklers for fire protection. 
viii.  FM 2008, Suppression Mode ESFR Automatic Sprinklers 
ix.  FM 1632, Telescoping Sprinkler Assemblies for Use in Fire Protection Systems 

x. 

for Anechoic Chambers 
EN 12259-1, Fixed firefighting systems. Components for sprinkler and water 
spray systems. Sprinklers 

xi.  prEN 12259-14, Fixed firefighting systems. Components for sprinkler and water 

spray systems. Sprinklers- Part 14. Sprinklers for residential applications 

xii.  LPS 1038, Requirements & Testing Methods for EPEC Sprinklers 

xiii.  LPS 1039, Requirements & Testing Methods for Automatic Sprinklers (inc TS1 

Automatic Sprinklers commercial and domestic & residential, TS 4 Multiple Jet 

Controls, TS 8 Electrically Operated Sprinkler Heads, TS 9 Dual Sensing Sprin-

kler Heads) 

xiv.  LPS 1258, Requirements & Testing Methods for tight operating tolerance glass 

sprinkler bulbs 

xv.  LPS 1267, Requirements & Testing Methods for ESFR Sprinkler Heads 

xvi.  LPS 2072, Requirements & Testing Methods for K160 ELO Sprinkler Heads 
xvii.  BS 9252, Components for residential sprinkler systems. Specification and test 

methods for residential sprinklers. 

xvii.  UL 2167 Water Mist Nozzles for Fire-Protection Service nozzles for Fire-

Protection Service 

xix.  UL 2351, Water Spray Nozzles 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 771 of 13486.1.8.  Fire Hose 
 

FM 2111,2131, Fire Hose Assemblies and Hose couplings. 
FM 2141, Fire Hose racks and reels. 

i. 
ii. 
iii.  UL 19, Lined Fire Hose and Hose Assemblies. 
iv.  UL 219, Lined Fire Hose for Interior Standpipes. 
v. 

EN 671-1, Fixed firefighting systems.  Hose systems.  Hose reels with semi-rigid 
hose 

vi.  EN 671-2, Fixed firefighting systems. Hose systems. Hose systems with lay-flat 

hose 

vii.  EN 14540, Fire-fighting hoses. Non-percolating layflat hoses for fixed systems 
viii.  BS EN 694, Fire-fighting hoses.  Semi-rigid hoses for fixed systems 
ix.  BS 336, Fire-fighting hose couplings 
 

 
6.1.9.  Fire Fighting Nozzles 
 

i. 

FM 5511 - Firefighting Nozzles for Use with Hose, Monitor Assemblies and oth-
er Firefighting Equipment. 

ii.  UL 401, Portable Spray Hose Nozzles for Fire-Protection Service  
 

6.1.10.  Fire Fighting Monitors 
 

i. 

FM 1421 - Monitor Assembly  

 
6.1.11.  Fire Hose Cabinets 
 

FM 2151, Fire Hose houses and outdoor hose cabinets. 

i. 
ii.  UL 47, Semiautomatic Fire Hose Storage Devices 

 
6.1.12.  Water Mist Systems 
 

i. 
ii. 

FM 5560, Water Mist Systems. 
LPS 1283, Requirements and test methods for the approval of watermist sys-
tems for use in commercial low hazard occupancies 

 
 
 

 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 772 of 13486.1.13.  Underground Pipes and Fittings 
 

i. 

ii. 

FM 1613, Approval Standard for Polyethylene (PE) Pipe and Fittings for under-
ground fire protection service, in accordance with NFPA 24 and AWWA C906, 
minimum DR-9 with temperature and pressure rating not less than the system 
working pressure. 
FM 1614, Approval Standard for Fiber Reinforced Composite (FRC) Pipes and 
Fittings for underground fire protection service. 

iii.  FM 1620, Approval Standard for Pipe joints and anchor fittings for under-

ground fire protection service.  

iv.  UL 1285 Pipe and Couplings, Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC), and Oriented Polyvinyl 

Chloride (PVCO) for Underground Fire Service 

v.  UL 1713 Pressure Pipe and Couplings, Glass Fiber-Reinforced, for Underground 

Fire Service 

 vi.  UL 194 Gasketed Joints for Ductile-Iron Pipe and Fittings for Fire Protection 

Service 

 
6.1.14.  Aboveground Pipes and Fittings 
 

i. 

FM 1920, Approval Standard for Pipe coupling and fittings for aboveground fire 
protection service.  

ii.  ANSI/UL 852, Metallic Sprinkler Pipe for Fire Protection Service 
iii.  ANSI/UL 1821, Thermoplastic Sprinkler Pipe and Fittings for Fire Protection 

Service 

iv.  FM 1637, Flexible Sprinkler Hose with Fittings 
v. 
FM 1630, Steel Pipe for Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems 
vi.  UL 852, Metallic Sprinkler Pipe for Fire Protection Service  
vii.  UL 1821, Thermoplastic Sprinkler Pipe and Fittings for Fire Protection Service  
viii.  ASTM A53, Galvanized Steel ERW Pipe, sch 40.  
ix.  ASTM A53, Galvanized Steel Seamless Pipe, sch 40.  

 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 773 of 1348 

 

6.1.15.  Valves 
 

FM 1041, Approval Standard for Alarm Check Valve 
FM 1021, Dry Pipe Valves 

i. 
ii. 
iii.  FM 1020, Automatic Water Control Valves 
iv.  FM 1120, 1130, Fire Service Water Control Valves (OS & Y and NRS Type Gate 

Valves) 

v.    FM 1210, Swing Check Valves 
vi.  FM 1362, Pressure Reducing Valves 
vii.  FM 1031, Quick Opening Devices (Accelerators and Exhausters) for Dry Pipe 

Valves 

FM 1140, Quick Opening Valves 1⁄4 Inch Through 2 Inch Nominal Size 

viii.  FM 1042, Waterflow Alarm Indicators (Vane Type) 
ix.  FM 1045, Waterflow Detector Check Valves 
x. 
xi.  FM 1111, Approval Standard for Post Indicator Valve assembly 
xii.  FM 1112, Indicating Valves (Butterfly or Ball Type) 
xiii.  ANSI/UL 193, Alarm Valves for Fire Protection Service 
xiv.  ANSI/UL 260, Dry Pipe and Deluge Valves for Fire Protection Service 
xv.  UL 1478, Fire Pump Relief Valves 
xvi.  UL 1726, Automatic Drain Valves for Standpipe Systems 
xvii.  UL 2573, Air release valve 
xviii. UL 258, Shutoff Valves for Trim and Drain Purposes 
xix.  UL 668, Hose Valves for Fire Protection Service 
xx.  UL 1486, quick Opening Devices for Dry Pipe Valves for Fire Protection Service 
xxi.  UL 1468, Pressure Reducing Valve 
xxii.  UL 1726, Automatic Drain Valves for Standpipe Systems 
xxiii. UL 258, Shutoff Valves for Trim and Drain Purposes 
xxiv. UL 262, Gate Valves for Fire Protection Service 
xxv.  ANSI/UL 312, Check Valves for Fire Protection Service 
xxvi. UL 1091, Butterfly Valves for Fire Protection Service 
xxvii.  ANSI/UL 1468, Direct Acting Pressure Reducing, Restricting Valves 
xxviii.  ANSI/UL 1739, Pilot-Operated Pressure-Control Valves  
xxix.  EN 12259-2, Fixed firefighting systems.  Components for sprinkler and water 

xxx. 

spray systems.  Wet alarm assemblies. 
EN 12259-3, Fixed firefighting systems.  Components for sprinkler and water 
spray systems.  Dry alarm valve assemblies. 

xxxi.  BS 5041-1, Fire hydrant systems equipment.  Specification for landing valves 

for wet risers. 

xxxii.  BS 5041-2, Fire hydrant systems equipment.  Specification for landing valves 

for dry risers. 

xxxiii.  BS 5041-4, Fire hydrant systems equipment.  Specification for boxes for land-

ing valves for dry risers. 

xxxiv.  BS 12094-13, Fixed firefighting systems.  Components for gas extinguishing 
systems.  Requirements and test methods for check valves and non-return 
valves. 

xxxv.  BS 5041-3, Fire hydrant systems equipment.  Specification for inlet breeching 

s for dry riser inlets. 

xxxvi.  BS 5041-5, Fire hydrant systems equipment.  Specification for boxes for foam 

inlets and dry riser inlets. 

xxxvii. BS 5154, Gate Valve. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 774 of 13486.1.15.  Valves 
 

xxxvii.  BS EN 593, Industrial vales. Metallic butterfly valves 
xxxviii.  LPS 1040, Requirements and Testing Methods for Wet Alarm Valve Sets 
xxxix.  LPS 1041, Requirements and Testing Procedures for the LPCB Approval and 

Listing of Dry Pipe Valve Sets 
LPS 1185, Requirements for Testing Gear Operated Butterfly Valves 

xxxx. 

xxxxi.  LPS 1186, Requirements and Testing Methods for Check Valves 

xxxxii.  EN 12259-2, Fixed firefighting systems. Components for sprinkler and water 

spray systems. Wet alarm valve assemblies 

xxxxiii.  EN 1074-1, Valves for fire water  
xxxxiv.  EN 1074-2, Valves for fire water 
xxxxv.  EN 12259-3, Fixed firefighting systems. Components for sprinkler and water 

spray systems. Dry alarm valve assemblies 

xxxxvi.  LPS TS3, Requirements and Testing for Deluge Valves and Actuators 
xxxxvii. LPS 2071,Requirements for LPCB Approved Pre-Action Systems for use in 

sprinkler systems  

xxxxviii. prEN 12259-9. Fixed firefighting systems. Components for sprinkler and 

water spray systems. Part 9. Deluge alarm valves 

xxxxix.  UL 789. Indicator Posts for Fire-Protection Service  
 

 
6.1.16.  Hangers 
 

i. 
ii. 

ANSI/UL 203, Pipe Hanger Equipment for Fire Protection Service 
FM 1951, 1952, 1953, Pipe Hanger Components for Automatic Sprinkler Sys-
tems 

iii.  FM 1950, Seismic Sway Brace Components for Automatic Sprinkler Systems 
iv.  LPS 1194, Requirements & Test Methods for Pipe Hangers 
 

6.1.17.  Fittings 

Fittings ANSI/UL 213, Rubber Gasketed Fittings for Fire Protection Service 
FM 1920, Pipe Couplings and Fittings for Fire Protection Systems 

 
i. 
ii. 
iii.  UL 1474, Adjustable Drop Nipples for Sprinkler Systems 
iv.  FM 1631, Adjustable and Fixed Sprinkler Fittings 1⁄2 Inch through 1 Inch Nomi-

nal Size 

v.  ANSI/UL 2443, Flexible Sprinkler Hose with Fittings for Fire Protection Service 
vi.  LPS 1219, Requirements and testing procedures for the LPCB approval and 

listing of pipe couplings 

vii.  LPS 1261, Requirements for Testing Flexible Hoses for Sprinkler Systems 
 

6.1.18.  Water Motor Gong 
 

FM 1055, Approval Standard for Water Motor Gong. 

i. 
ii.  BS EN 12259-4, Fixed firefighting systems.  Components for sprinkler and wa-

ter spray systems.  Water motor alarms. 

iii.  UL 346, Waterflow Indicators for Fire Protective Signaling Systems 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 775 of 1348 

 

6.1.19.  Wet Chemical Systems 
 

i. 

ii. 

UL 300, Fire Testing of Fire Extinguishing Systems for Protection of Commercial  
Cooking Equipment. 
LPS 1223, Requirements & Testing Procedures for Approval of fixed Fire Ext 
Systems for Catering Equipment 

 
6.1.20.  Dry Chemical Systems 
 

i. 
ii. 

UL 1254, Standard for pre-engineered Dry Chemical Fire extinguishing System. 
FM 5320 - Dry Chemical Extinguishing Systems  

 
6.1.21.  Inert Gas Clean Agent Systems 
 

UL 2127, Standard for Inert Gas Clean Agent Extinguishing System Units. 
FM 5600 - Clean Agent Extinguishing Systems  

i. 
ii. 
 

6.1.22.  Chemical Gas Clean Agent Systems 
 

UL 2166, Standard for Halocarbon Clean Agent Extinguishing System 
Units. 
FM 5600 - Clean Agent Extinguishing Systems  

i. 

ii. 
 

6.1.23.  CO2 Systems (Industrial Use Only) 
 

i. 

FM 5420 - Carbon Dioxide Extinguishing Systems   

 
6.1.24.  Foam System 
 

UL 162, Standard for Safety Foam Equipment and Liquid Concentrates. 
i. 
ii.  UL 139, Standard for Medium and High Expansion foam Equipment and 

Liquid Concentrates. 
FM-5133, Standard for Safety Foam Equipment  

 
iii.  FM 5130 - Foam Extinguishing Systems  

 
6.1.25.  Deluge/Pre-action System 

FM 1011/1012/1013, Deluge and Pre-action Sprinkler Systems. 

 
i. 
ii.  UL 260/262/260 - Pre-action Systems 
 

6.1.26.  Yard Hydrant System, Wet Barrel, above ground 

 
i. 
ii. 
ii.    EN 1074-6, Fitness for verification test, Hydrants 

UL 246, Standard for Hydrants for Fire Protection. 
FM 1510/1511 - Fire Hydrants (Dry/Wet Barrel Type) for Private Fire Service.  

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 776 of 1348 
6.1.27.  Heavy Duty Mobile Equipment Protection Systems 

 
i. 

FM 5970 - Heavy Duty Mobile Equipment Protection Systems. 

 
6.1.28.  Fire Water Tanks and Ancillaries 

 
i. 

 

LPS 1276, Requirements for the LPCB Certification and Listing of above ground 
Suction Tanks for Sprinkler Systems. 

6.1.29.  Fire rated Cable, Certified for 120 minutes 

  

i. 

EN 50200, Method of test for resistance to fire of unprotected small cables for 

use in emergency circuits 

ii.    UL  2196, Standard for Fire Test for Circuit Integrity of Fire-Resistive Power, 

Instrumentation, Control, and Data Cables  

iii.    BS 8434-2, Methods of test for assessment of the fire integrity of electric ca-

bles. Test for unprotected small cables for use in emergency circuits. BS EN 

50200 with a 930° flame and with water spray . 

iv.    BS 7629-1, Electric cables. Specification for 300/500 V fire resistant screened 

cables having low emission of smoke and corrosive gases when affected by 

fire. Multicore and multipair cables. 

v.    BS 6387, Test method for resistance to fire of cables required to maintain cir-

cuit integrity under fire conditions. 

vi.    IEC 60331-1, Tests for electric cables under fire conditions. 

vii.    IEC 60331-2, Tests for electric cables under fire conditions. 

viii.   IEC 60332-2-2, Tests on electric and optical fibre cables under fire conditions. 

ix.    IEC 60332-3-10, Tests on electric and optical fibre cables under fire conditions. 

x.     IEC 60331-2, Tests for electric cables under fire conditions. 

xi.    UL 1724, Outline of Investigation for Fire Tests for Electrical Circuit Protective 

Systems. 

xii.   UL 1685, Standard for Vertical-Tray Fire-Propagation and Smoke-Release Test 

for Electrical and Optical-Fiber Cables. 

xiii.   UL 1666, UL 1666 Test for Flame Propagation Height of Electrical and Optical-

Fiber Cables Installed Vertically in Shafts.  

 

6.1.30.  Breeching inlet 

 
i. 
 

UL 405, Fire Department connections. 

6.1.31.  Fire Pump Assembly 

 
i. 

UL 448 D, Outline of Investigation for Fire Pump, Driver and Controller Assem-
bly Rating Compatibility  

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 777 of 1348Chapter 10 
SMOKE CONTROL AND SMOKE 
MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 778 of 1348In this Chapter: 
Î Design criteria for ventilation, smoke containment and smoke 

management systems. 

Î Application of smoke control systems for various locations and 

occupancies. 

Î Acceptance tests and maintenance of smoke control systems. 

Intent of the Chapter: 

•  Restrict the spread of smoke through air duct systems within a building 

or into a building from the outside. 

•  To  maintain  tenable  conditions,  limit  smoke  from  entering  stairwells, 
means of egress, smoke refuge areas, elevator shafts, or similar areas 
where evacuees are in the process of egress during fire emergencies. 

•  Assist fire fighters visibility during combating fire and post fire smoke 
clearance, Contribute to the protection of life and property, enabling the 
reduction of downtime of the affected facility and business. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 779 of 1348 

In this Chapter : 

INTENTIONS 

  Design criteria for Ventilation, 

Smoke containment and Smoke 
Management Systems.  

  Application of Smoke Control 

Systems for  various locations and 
occupancies. 

  Acceptance Tests and maintenance 

of Smoke Control Systems 

  Restrict the spread of smoke through air duct systems within a 

building or into a building from the outside. 

  To maintain tenable conditions, Limit smoke from entering 

stairwells, means of egress, smoke refuge areas, elevator shafts, 
or similar areas where evacuees are in the process of egress 
during fire emergencies.  

  Assist Fire Fighters visibility during combating fire and post fire 

smoke clearance, Contribute to the protection of life and 
property, enabling the reduction of downtime of the affected 
facility and business.   

1. Definitions 

1.1. General 

 

It is a mandatory requirement by Civil Defence. 

 
 
1.1.5.  Pascal (Pa) 
 
 
 
1.1.6.  Cubic Feet Per Minute (cfpm) 
 
 
 
1.1.7.  Kilowatt  (kW) 
 

It is the unit of volumetric flow rate capacity for finding air volume velocity or air flow. 
1 cfpm = 0.000048 m3/second 

It is the unit of energy equivalent to 1 kilowatt of power sustained for 1 hour. 1 Watt 
is 1 joules per second. 
1kW= 3.6 Mega Joules ( Energy transferred  to an object when force of 1 N is applied 
to it, in the direction of its motion through distance of 1 meter. 

 

 
1.1.8.  Heat Release Rate (HRR) 
 

The heat release rate (HRR) can be measured in Joules per second, which is termed 
Watts. Since a fire puts out much more than 1 Watt, it is usually convenient to quanti-
fy the HRR in kilowatts (1000 W) or megawatts (a million watts, MW). 

 

 

1.1.1.  Shall  
 
 
1.1.2.  Should 
 
 
1.1.3.  Listed 
 
 
1.1.4.  Newton (N) 
 

It is a suggested requirement recommended by Civil Defence but not mandatory. 

Approved and registered by individual Emirates’ Civil Defence material department. 

SI unit of force. It is equal to the force that would give a mass of one kilogram an ac-
celeration of one meter per second per second  (Second squared) 
1 lbf  (Pound Force) = 4.4 N (Newton) 

The SI unit of pressure, equal to one newton per square meter. 
0.1” w.g. (Inches of water column) = 25 Pa (Pascal) 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 780 of 1348 

 

An expression of force exerted on a surface per unit area. 

1.1.9.  Pressure 
 
 
1.1.10.  Air Density 
 

The mass per unit of volume of air depending on temperature and humidity. Air 
density is variable and changes with altitude. The sea level standard value of air 
density r = 1.229 kg/m3

 = 0.00237 slug/feet3  

 
1.1.11.  Design Air Velocity 
 

The desired air velocity through the open door between the pressurized and un-
pressurized spaces on the fire floor. To achieve design air velocity it is indispensable 
to provide properly sized air release from the fire floor.  

 
 
 

 

   

 

 
 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 781 of 1348 

 

1.2.  Smoke Control System 

 
1.2.1.   Smoke.  

 

 

 

 

 

The airborne solid and liquid particulates and gases evolved when a material under-
goes pyrolysis or combustion, together with the quantity of air that is entrained or 
otherwise mixed into the mass. 

 
1.2.2. Smoke Control.  
 

A system that utilizes fans to produce pressure differences so as to manage smoke 
movement. 

1.2.3.  Smoke Management 
 

A smoke control method that utilizes natural or mechanical systems to main-
tain a tenable environment in the means of egress from a large-volume space or to 
control and reduce the migration of smoke between the fire area and communicating 
spaces. 

1.2.4.  Smoke Zone (Smoke Control Zone)  
 

A space within a building where  smoke may be controlled through compartmenta-
tion and pressurization. 

1.2.5.  Natural Ventilation.  
 

A method of supplying or removing, air from a space through openings on the exteri-
or of a building, using natural air movement from the outside. 

1.2.6.  Mechanical Ventilation.  
 

A method of supplying or removing , air from a space with aid of mechanically operat-
ed equipment such as Fans and ductwork. 

 
1.2.7.  Smoke Exhaust System.  
 

A mechanical or gravity system intended to move smoke from the smoke zone to the 
exterior of the building, including smoke removal, purging, and venting systems, as 
well as the function of exhaust fans utilized to reduce the pressure in a smoke zone.  
Achieving tenable environment for egress is not the scope of these kind of systems. 

1.2.8.  Smoke Damper.  
 

A device installed within an air-distribution system or within smoke exhaust system to 
control the movement of smoke,  i.e.  to stay shut to prevent the spread of smoke 
into other compartments or to open to exhaust smoke outside from the fire zone 
through smoke exhaust ductwork. 

 
1.2.9.  Fire Damper.  
 

A device, installed in an air distribution system, designed to close automatically upon 
detection of heat, or through fire alarm panel signal, to interrupt migratory airflow, 
and to restrict the passage of flame and heat. 

 
1.2.10.  Combination Fire and Smoke Damper.  

 A device installed in an air distribution system, designed to close automatically upon 
detection of heat or through fire alarm signal, to interrupt migratory airflow and to 
restrict the passage of flame, smoke and heat. Combination fire and smoke damper 
shall not be installed in an smoke exhaust system for smoke exhaust applications. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 782 of 13481.2.  Smoke Control System 

 
1.2.11.  Fire Wall.  

 A wall separating buildings or subdividing a building to prevent the spread of fire and 
having a minimum fire resistance rating of 2 hours and structural stability. 

 
1.2.12.  Fire Barrier Wall  

  A wall, other than Fire Wall, having a fire resistance  rating. 

 
1.2.13.  Smoke Barrier.  

  A 1-hour Fire rated continuous membrane, either vertical or horizontal, such as a 
wall, floor, or ceiling assembly, that is designed and constructed to restrict the 
movement of smoke. 

 
1.2.14.  Smokeproof Enclosure.  

  An exit enclosure designed and constructed so that the movement of the products 
of combustion produced by a fire occurring in any part of the building into the en-
closure is limited. 

 
1.2.15.  Plenum.  

  A compartment or chamber to which one or more air ducts are connected and that 
forms part of the air distribution system. 

 
1.2.16.  Air Connector.  

  A conduit for transferring air between an air duct or plenum and an air terminal 
unit or an air inlet or air outlet. 

 
1.2.17.  Air Duct.  

  A conduit or passageway for conveying air to or from heating, cooling, air condition-
ing, or ventilating equipment, but not including the plenum. 

 
1.2.18.  Atrium.  

  A large-volume space created by a floor opening or series of floor openings con-
necting two or more stories that is covered at the top of the series of openings and 
is used for purposes other than an enclosed stairway; an elevator hoist way; an es-
calator opening; or as a utility shaft used for plumbing, electrical, air-conditioning, 
or communications facilities. 

 
1.2.19.  Mall.  

  A roofed or covered common pedestrian area within a mall building that serves as 
access for two or more tenants and does not exceed three levels that are open to 
each other. 

 
1.2.20.  Theatre.  

  A building or room where plays, shows, and similar events, are performed on a 
stage or a room often with rising tiers of seats for assemblies. 

 
1.2.21.  Regular Stage.  

  A stage with a height of 15 m or less measured from the lowest point on the stage 
floor to the highest point of the roof or floor deck above. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 783 of 1348 

 

1.2.  Smoke Control System 

 
1.2.22.  Legitimate Stage  

  A stage with a height greater than 15 m measured from the lowest point on the 
stage floor to the highest point of the roof or floor deck above. 

 
1.2.23.  Mechanical Smoke Containment  

  A smoke control method that uses mechanical equipment to produce pressure 
differences across smoke barriers. 

 
1.2.24.  Smoke Control Mode  

  Predefined operational configuration of a system/device for the purpose of smoke 
control. 

 
1.2.25.  Smoke Containment Systems  

  A smoke control system in a given building designed to contain smoke to a given 
zone or keep smoke from entering another zone. This can also be achieved by pas-
sive smoke containment using Smoke barriers. 

 
1.2.26.  Compensated System  

  A system that adjusts for changing conditions either by modulating supply airflows 
or by relieving excess pressure. 

 
1.2.27.  Tenable Environment 

  An environment in which smoke, heat and associated products of combustion are 
limited or otherwise restricted to maintain the impact on occupants to a level that 
is not life threatening. 

 
1.2.28.  Design Pressure Difference  

  The desired pressure difference between the protected space and an adjacent 
space measured at the boundary of the protected space under a specified set of 
conditions with the smoke-control system operating. 

 
1.2.29.  Pressurization System  

  A type of smoke-control system with arrangement of constant or variable capacity 
Fans, Ducting, Relief Dampers, air grills and other features provided to achieve high-
er pressure in mechanically pressurized space than in the fire area.  

 
1.2.30.  Stair Pressurization  

  A type of smoke-control system in which stair shafts are mechanically pressurized, 
with respect to the fire area, with outdoor air to keep smoke from contaminating 
them during a fire incident. 

 
1.2.31.  Multiple-Injection Pressurization System  

  A type of smoke-control system that has pressurization air supplied from multiple 
locations. 

 
1.2.32.  Single-Injection Pressurization System  

  A type of smoke-control system that has pressurization air supplied from only one 
location. 

 
 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 784 of 1348 

 

1.2.  Smoke Control System 

 
1.2.33.  Stack Effect.  

  Pressure differential resulting from a difference in density between two intercon-
nected columns of air at different temperatures, resulting in the movement of air 
into and out of buildings.  

 
1.2.34.   Communicating Space 

  A space within a building that has an open pathway to a large-volume space such 
that smoke from a fire either in the communicating space or in a large-volume 
space can move from one to another without restriction. Communicating space can 
either open directly to large volume space or through a passageway. 

 
1.2.35.   Axisymmetric Plume.  

  A plume that rises above a fire, does not come into contact with walls or other ob-
stacles, and is not disrupted or deflected by airflow. 

 
1.2.36.   Balcony Spill Plume.  

  A smoke plume that originates from a compartment fire, flows out the doorway, 
flows under a balcony, and flows upward after passing the balcony edge. 

 
1.2.37.   Air Release  

  A mechanical or gravity system intended to move air from the interior to the exteri-
or of the building in order to provide air release for pressurization system.  

 
1.2.38.   Separated Spaces.  

  Spaces within a building that are isolated from large-volume spaces by smoke barri-
ers. 

 
1.2.39.   Smoke Curtain or Draft Curtain.   

  A non-combustible solid material, beam, girder, or similar material or construction 
that is used to channel or contain smoke and that is attached to the underside of 
the ceiling and protrudes a limited distance downward. 

 
1.2.40.   End-to-End Verification.  

  A self-testing method that provides positive confirmation that the desired result 
(e.g., pressure difference, airflow or damper position) has been achieved when a 
controlled device has been activated, such as during smoke control, testing, or man-
ual override operations. 

 
1.2.41.   Fuel Limited Fire.  

  A fire that has a heat release rate that is controlled by the material burning. 

 
1.2.42.   Growth Time (tg).  

  The time interval from the time of effective ignition until the heat release rate of 
the fire is 1000 Btu/sec (1055 kW). 

 
1.2.43.   Large-Volume Space.  

  An uncompartmented space, generally two or more stories in height, within which 
smoke from a fire either in the space or in a communicating space can move and 
accumulate without restriction. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 785 of 13481.2.  Smoke Control System 

 
1.2.44.   Network Modeling.  

  Network modes consist of representing each rooms in a building as a node, and 
shafts as a series of vertical nodes. Each node is at one pressure and temperature. 
The nodes are connected by flow paths that represent leakages such as construc-
tion cracks in walls and floors, gaps around doors, and open doors. A computer pro-
gram is used to solve for the flows and pressure differences throughout a building.  

 
1.2.45.   Plugholing.  

  The condition in which air from below the smoke layer is pulled through the smoke 
layer into the smoke exhaust due to a high exhaust rate. 

 
1.2.46.   Sprinkler Controlled Fire.  

  A fire that has a constant or decaying heat release rate due to the action of sprin-
kler spray. 

 
1.2.47.  Steady Fire.  

  A fire that has a constant heat release rate. 

 
1.2.48.   Transition Zone.  

  The layer between the smoke layer interface and the first indication of smoke in 
which the smoke layer temperature decreases to ambient. 

 
1.2.49.   T-squared (t2) Fire.  

  A fire that has a heat release rate that grows proportionally to the square of time 
from ignition. 

 
1.2.50.   Unsteady Fire.  

  A fire that has a heat release rate that varies with respect to time. 

 
1.2.51.  Ventilation Limited Fire.  

  A fire where every object in the fire compartment is fully involved in fire and the 
heat release rate depends on the airflow through the openings to the fire compart-
ment. 

 
1.2.52.   Backdraft Damper.  

  A device allowing airflow in one direction only.  

 
1.2.53.   Pressure Relief Damper 

  A device  having an adjustable start-open pressure, that  is capable of maintaining a 
relatively constant  pressure at various airflows and which closes upon a decrease in 
differential pressure.  

 
1.2.54.   Motorized Pressure Regulating Damper  

  A device  having an adjustable start-open pressure, that  is capable of maintaining a 
relatively constant  pressure at various airflows and which closes  upon a decrease 
in differential pressure.  

 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 786 of 13481.2.  Smoke Control System 

 
1.2.55.  Differential Pressure Sensor  

  A device that measures the difference between two pressures, one connected to 
each side of the sensor.  

 
1.2.56.  Pressurization Kit  

  A kit with predefined components capable of producing and controlling set value of 
pressure differential between mechanically pressurized space and the reference.  

.  
1.2.57.  Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) 

  The prediction of the behavior of fluids and of the effects of fluid motion past ob-
jects by numerical methods.  

 
1.2.58.  Forced Airflow Pressurization System 

  A type of compensated smoke-control system intended to reduce negative influ-
ence of wind forces and counteract stack effect using controlled airflow resistance 
of pressurized space that automatically adjusts for changing conditions by modu-
lating supply and exhaust airflows basing on continuous measurement of pressure 
differences.  

.  
1.2.59.  Piston Effect  

  Transient pressures produced by elevator car motion in a pressurized hoistway that 
can pull smoke into pressurized elevator lobby or hoistway.  

 
1.2.60.  Wind forces  

  Forces influencing pressure layout inside and around the building resulting in posi-
tive pressures at the windward façade and negative pressure at the leeward façade.  

 
1.2.61.  Door Opening Force 

  A force required to open the door measured at the knob under specific set of condi-
tions with the smoke-control system operating.  

 
1.2.62.  Commissioning 

  Process by which an installed system is assessed to confirm it meets requirements 
of relevant standards and tested to verify if it functions according to its design ob-
jectives and intent.  

 
1.2.63.  Inspection 

  Actions involving examination and testing of the system carried out in order to de-
termine that the system is in proper technical condition.  

 
1.2.64.  Maintenance 

  Actions necessary for retaining or restoring a system to the specified operable con-
dition. 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 787 of 1348 

2.  Smoke Control Systems 

 

2.1. Intention 

2.1.1.  Smoke Control System requirements in this section are to accomplish the following.                             

a. Prohibit smoke from entering stairwells, means of egress, smoke refuge areas, 
elevator shafts, or similar areas where evacuees are in the process of egress during 
fire emergencies.                                                                                                                                            
b.  Maintain a tenable environment in smoke refuge areas and means of egress dur-
ing the time required for evacuation.                                                                                                        
c. Prohibit the migration of smoke from the smoke zone and Fire area to neighboring 
zones.                                                                                                                                                                
d.  Provide tenable conditions outside the smoke zone that enable emergency re-
sponse personnel to conduct search and rescue operations and to locate and control 
the fire.                                                                                                                                         
e. Contribute to the protection of life and to the reduction of property loss. Thus en-
abling the reduction of downtime of the affected facility and businesses.  

 
2.1.2.  HVAC System (Heating and Ventilation and Air-Conditioning Systems) requirements 

in this chapter are to accomplish the follow-
ing.   

a.  Restrict the spread of smoke through air duct 

systems within a building or into a building 
from the outside.                                                 

b.  Restrict the spread of fire through air duct sys-

tems from the area of fire origin, whether locat-
ed within the building or outside.   

c.  Maintain the fire-resistive integrity of building 
components and elements such as floors, parti-
tions, roofs, walls, and floor- or roof-ceiling as-
semblies affected by the installation of air duct 
systems.                                           

d.  Minimize the ignition sources and combustibil-

ity of the elements of the air duct systems.  

e.  Where considered in design, permit the air duct 

Did You Know? 

It is estimated that 50–80% of 

fire deaths are the result of 

smoke inhalation injuries. 

The hot smoke kills by a com-

bination of thermal damage, 

poisoning, pulmonary irritation 

and swelling, caused by carbon 

monoxide, cyanide and other 

combustion products. 

systems in a building to be used for the additional purpose of smoke control system. 

 
2.1.3.  Requirements provided in this chapter are minimum guidelines. It is the consultant's 
responsibility to further refer and comply with referenced standards for this chapter, 
as mentioned in Section 2.1.4.       

 
2.1.4.  This chapter is based on NFPA 90 A, NFPA 92, NFPA 96, NFPA 30, NFPA 204, BR 186, 
BR 258, EN 12101-6, BS 7346 Part 4, ASHRAE, SFPE guidelines, Manufacturer’s spec-
ifications, guidelines etc.                                 

                           

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 788 of 1348 

2.2.  Components of Smoke Control and HVAC Systems 

2.2.1.  Components involved in Smoke Control Systems and HVAC Systems shall comply 

with Table 10.1.  

Table 10.1.: Components of Smoke Control and HVAC Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

i. 

ii. 

Smoke Exhaust and smoke extract fans shall be rated at and capable of operating 
effectively at 400°C for 2 hours. 
Fresh air supply and pressurization fans need not be fire rated, provided they are 
installed on roof or to the exterior open environment. 

iii.  Dual mode fans, serving as both the fresh air supply and /or extract purposes, shall 

be rated at and capable of operating effectively at 400°C for 2 hours.  

i. 

Exposed fan inlets shall be protected with metal screens to prevent the entry of pa-
per, trash and foreign materials. 

ii.  Outside air intakes shall be protected by screens of corrosion-resistant material not 

larger than 12.7 mm mesh. 

iii.  Outside air intakes shall be located so that these shall not introduce fire or smoke 

into the building.  

iv.  The outside air intakes shall be minimum 5 m away from air/smoke/exhaust dis-

charge openings/grills. 
Electrostatic air cleaners shall be listed in accordance with ANSI/UL 867. 

v. 
vi.  Air filters shall be rated either as Class 1 or Class 2 in accordance with ANSI/UL 900. 

1.  HVAC DUCTS 
 
i. 

Air ducts for HVAC systems shall be constructed of iron, steel, aluminum, copper, 
concrete, masonry. See Figure 10.1. for illustrations.  

ii.  Class 0 or Class 1 rigid or flexible air ducts tested in accordance with ANSI/UL 181 

listing shall be permitted to be used for ducts when air temperature in the ducts does 
not exceed 250°C or when used as vertical ducts serving not more than two adjacent 
stories in height. 

iii.  Pipe and duct insulation and coverings, duct linings, vapor retarder facings, adhe-
sives, fasteners, tapes and supplementary materials added to air ducts, plenums, 
panels, and duct silencers used in duct systems, shall have, in the form in which they 
are used, a maximum flame spread index of 25 without evidence of continued pro-
gressive combustion and a maximum smoke developed index of 50 when tested in 
accordance with ASTM E 84 or UL 723. See Section 6 for Duct test requirements. 

iv.  Flammable, non-listed and non-approved insulation coverings and tapes shall not be 

installed. 

v.  Pipe and duct insulation and coverings, duct linings and their adhesives, and tapes 
shall use the specimen preparation and mounting procedures of ASTM E 2231. See 
Figure 10.2. for illustrations. 

vi.  Air connectors shall not pass through any wall, partition, or enclosure of a vertical 
shaft that is required to have a fire resistance rating of 1 hour or more. Air connect-
ors shall not pass through floors. 

vii.  A service opening shall be provided in air ducts adjacent to each fire damper, smoke 

damper and any duct smoke detectors that need access for installation, cleaning, 
maintenance, inspection, and testing. 

viii.  Ventilation ducts should not pass through smokeproof enclosures or the firefighting 

lobby.  

ix.  Where unavoidable, the part of the ventilation duct within the firefighting lift lobby 
shall be enclosed in construction with fire resistance rating at least equal to that of 
the elements of structure. See Figure 10.3. for illustrations. Such construction shall 
be in masonry. If other form of fire resisting construction is used, the fire damper 
shall be fitted where the duct penetrates the lobby enclosure. No air conditioning or 
ventilation ducts shall penetrate separating walls. See Figure 10.4. 

1.  FANS 

2.  OUTSIDE 
AIR AND 
AIR       
FILTERS 

3. DUCTS 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 789 of 1348 

ITEMS 

3. DUCTS 

Table 10.1.: Components of Smoke Control and HVAC Systems 

REQUIREMENTS 

2.    SMOKE CONTROL SYSTEM DUCTS 
 
i. 

Ductwork for Smoke Control Systems (both exhaust and make-up air ducts) 
shall be of at least 1 hour fire resistance rated in sprinklered buildings and 2 
hour fire resistance rated in non sprinklered buildings, approved and listed in 
accordance with Section 6.1.12.  

ii.  Where a duct passes through other fire compartments of higher rating, the 
duct shall be constructed to have the same rating of that compartment. The 
rating shall apply to fire exposure from both interior and exterior of the duct 
or structure.  

iii.  Such fire rating of smoke control system ducts shall be evaluated and ap-

proved for fire rating as well as for Stability, Integrity and Insulation Criteria 
for fire rating.  

iv.  The complete duct system including supports, hangers, joints, gaskets, seal-

ant etc. shall be tested as assembly and in compliance with the approved test 
standards, in accordance with Section 6. 

 
 
 
 

Figure 10.1.: Duct Construction and Duct Penetration through walls 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 790 of 1348 
 
 
 

 

 

Figure 10.2.: Pipes with combustible insulation 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 791 of 1348 

 

 
 
 

Figure 10.3.: Ventilation Duct through Protected Lobby 

Figure 10.4.: Ventilation Duct through Protected Lobby 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 792 of 1348 

Table 10.1.: Components of Smoke Control and HVAC Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

4.  PLENUM 

i. 

ii. 

A concealed space between the ceiling and floor above it, ceiling and roof, or 
raised floor and structural floor of a building, where fully sprinklered, may be 
used as a plenum for smoke control systems provided that the concealed 
space contains only                                                                                                     
a. Mineral-insulated metal-sheathed cable                                                                          
b. Aluminum-sheathed cable                                                                                                          
c. Copper-sheathed cable                                                                                                              
d. Rigid metal conduit                                                                                                                        
e. Enclosed metal trunk                                                                                                               
f. Flexible metal conduit                                                                                                                 
g. Liquid-tight flexible metal conduit in lengths not more than 2 m                                      
h. Metal-clad cables                                                                                                                                       
i. Communication cables for Telecom, computers, television, telephones                       
j. Fire protection metal piping installations                                                                                  
k. Pipes of non-combustible material conveying non-flammable liquids. 
The supports for the ceiling membrane shall be of non-combustible material. 
See Figure 10.5. and Figure 10.6. for illustrations. 

iii.  Plenums shall not be used for occupancy or storage. 

 
 
 
 

Figure 10.5.: Return Air Plenum in ceiling space 

Figure 10.6.: Return Air Plenum under raised floor. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 793 of 1348 

Table 10.1.: Components of Smoke Control and HVAC Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  AHU ROOMS AS PLENUM SPACE 
 
i. 

Air-handling unit rooms, used as plenum space, shall not be used for storage or 
occupancy other than during equipment servicing.  

ii.  Materials used in the construction of an air-handling unit room plenum shall be 

noncombustible or shall be limited combustible having a maximum flame 
spread index of 25 and a maximum smoke developed index of 50 when tested 
in accordance with ASTM E 84 or UL 723 and shall be suitable for continuous 
exposure to the temperature and humidity conditions of the environmental air 
in the plenum. 

iii.  Electrical wires and cables and optical fiber cables shall be listed as having a 
maximum peak optical density of 0.50 or less, an average optical density of 
0.15 or less when tested in accordance with NFPA 262, and a maximum flame 
spread distance of 1.5 m or less, or shall be installed in metal raceways, metal 
sheathed cable, or totally enclosed nonventilated bus way, or shall comply with 
low smoke (LSF) to BS EN 61034-1 and zero halogen (LSOH) to IEC 60754-1 and 
BS EN 50267. 

iv.  Pneumatic tubing for control systems shall be listed as having a maximum peak 

v. 

optical density of 0.5 or less, an average optical density of 0.15 or less, and a 
maximum flame spread distance of 1.5 or less when tested in accordance with 
ANSI/UL 1820. 
Signalling, optical fiber, and communications raceways shall be listed as having 
a maximum peak optical density of 0.50 or less, an average optical density of 
0.15 or less, and a maximum flame spread distance of 1.5 m or less when test-
ed in accordance with ANSI/UL 2024. Cables installed within these raceways 
shall be listed as plenum cable. 

vi.  Loudspeakers, recessed lighting fixtures, and other electrical equipment with 
combustible enclosures, including their assemblies and accessories, nonmetal-
lic cable ties, wraps, nonmetallic cable supports, and other discrete products, 
shall be permitted in the ceiling cavity plenum where listed as having a maxi-
mum peak optical density of 0.5or less, an average optical density of 0.15 or 
less, and a peak heat release rate of 100 kW or less when tested in accordance 
with ANSI/UL 2043. 

vii.  Plastic piping and tubing used in plumbing systems shall be permitted to be 

used within a ceiling cavity plenum if it exhibits a flame spread index of 25 or 
less and a smoke developed index of 50 or less when tested in accordance with 
ASTM E 84  

 
2.     AHU ROOMS HAVING DUCTS OPENING DIRECTLY INTO SHAFTS 
 
i. 

The air-handling Unit rooms, including the protection of openings, shall be sep-
arated from shafts by a construction having a fire-resistance rating not less 
than that required for the shaft. 

ii.  A fire-resistant separation shall not be required for air-handling Unit rooms 

that are enclosed by a construction having a fire resistance rating not less than 
that required for the shaft. 

5.  AHU ROOMS 

 
 
 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 794 of 1348 

Table 10.1.: Components of Smoke Control and HVAC Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

6. FIRE CURTAINS   i. 

ii. 

Listed and approved fire curtains shall be permitted to achieve the desired 
compartmentation. 
Fire curtains, where utilized shall comply with the fire resistance rating re-
quired to establish the particular fire compartment in accordance with the con-
struction fire rating required by Chapter 1. Construction. 

iii.  Fire curtains shall also be permitted to be used as guiding channels for the 

smoke compartment to enhance the performance of smoke control strategies. 

iv.  Fire curtains shall be automatic, tested and approved in accordance with the 

test standards mentioned in Section 6. 

 
 
 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 795 of 1348 

Table 10.1.: Components of Smoke Control and HVAC Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

7.  SMOKE                 

i. 

CURTAINS 
(SMOKE 
SCREENS) 

Listed and approved smoke curtains shall be permitted to achieve the desired 
smoke control strategies to limit the smoke spread to certain zone or to chan-
nelize the smoke towards the extract fans to enhance the extract fan perfor-
mance and quick smoke clearance. 

ii.  All smoke curtains where required, unless permanently fixed in position, shall 

be brought into the position automatically to provide adequate smoke-
tightness and effective depth. The effective depth in general is 20% of the total 
floor ceiling height of the space. 

iii.  A smoke curtain or other smoke barrier at any access route forming part of or 

leading to a means of escape shall not in their operational position obstruct the 
escape of people through such route. See Figure 10.7. for illustrations. Howev-
er, the head room of clear 2030 mm shall be maintained in the escape route. 
iv.  Smoke curtains shall not be installed as fire curtains to establish fire compart-

v. 

ments. 
Smoke curtains shall be automatic, tested and approved in accordance with 
test standards mentioned in Section 6. 

1.  GENERAL 
 
i. 
ii.  Approved fire dampers shall be provided for air transfer openings in walls or 

Duct penetrations of fire walls should be avoided.  

partitions required to have a fire-resistance rating of 2 hour or more. 

iii.  Where air ducts extend through only one floor and serve only two adjacent 
stories, the air ducts shall be enclosed, or fire dampers shall be installed at 
each point where the floor is penetrated. See Figure 10.8. for illustrations. 

v. 

iv.  The ceiling radiation Fire Damper is required for Floor/Ceiling or Roof/Ceiling 
assemblies to automatically limit the radiated heat transfer through an air in-
let/outlet opening. 
Fire dampers used in any sensitive buildings as healthcare facilities, hotels 
(occupancy with sleeping risk), education buildings, and any buildings where 
the habitable height exceeds 23 m shall be controlled by an automatic alarm-
initiated device, and shall ensure no smoke leakage and no heat transfer oc-
curs. 

vi.  Fire dampers shall be with fusible link for HVAC systems and motorized (MSFD) 

for any active smoke control system. The motorized dampers shall be  inter-
faced with smoke control, HVAC or FACP in accordance with design strategy. 

Figure 10.7: Smoke Curtain Obstruction to means of egress 

8. FIRE DAMPER 

 
 

 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 796 of 1348 

Table 10.1.: Components of Smoke Control and HVAC Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

2.    FIRE RATING OF FIRE DAMPERS 
 
i. 

A 3-hour rated damper is required for 3 hour or greater fire resistance rated 
wall or assembly. 

ii.  A 90 minutes rated damper is required for less than a 3 hour rated fire re-

sistance rated wall or assembly. 

 
3.    AREAS WHERE FUSIBLE LINK TYPE FIRE DAMPERS ARE REQUIRED 
 
i. 

Ducts and air-transfer openings penetrating walls or partitions having a fire 
resistance rating of 2 or more hours. 

ii.  Ducts and air-transfer openings penetrating shaft walls having a fire re-

sistance rating of 1 or more hours. 

iii.  Ducts and air-transfer openings penetrating floors that are required to have 

protected openings where the duct is not protected by a shaft enclosure. 
iv.  Air-transfer openings that occur in walls or partitions that are required to 

have a fire-resistive rating of 30 minutes or more. 

v.  See Figure 10.9. for illustration. Also see Chapter 1, Section 2.15. for damper 

details. 

 
4.    AREAS WHERE FUSIBLE LINK TYPE FIRE DAMPERS ARE NOT REQUIRED 
 
i.  HVAC duct branching serving apartments, dwelling units, health care sleeping 
units, class rooms, detention and correction cells, shall not require fire damp-
ers. 

ii.  Ducts serving a smoke control system and such a system requires logical duct 

iii. 
iv. 

distribution and duct isolations to achieve a smoke control strategy. 
In floors that do not require protected floor openings. 
In a duct system serving only one floor and used only for the exhaust of air to 
the outside and not penetrating a wall or partition having a required fire re-
sistance rating of 2 hours or more or passing entirely through the system and 
contained within its own dedicated shaft. 

v.  Where branch ducts connect to enclosed exhaust risers in which the airflow 
is upward, and steel subducts at least 22 in. (560 mm) in length are carried 
up inside the riser at each inlet. 

vi.  A fusible link type fire damper shall not be required for the following loca-

tions:                                                                                                                              
a. Clothes Dryer Exhaust Ducts                                                                                                   
b. Hazardous Fume Exhaust Duct                                                                                               
c. Stairwell Pressurization Ducts                                                                                                
d. Smoke Extraction Ducts                                                                                                           
e. Laundry and Trash Chutes 

 
5.  AREAS WHERE MOTORIZED SMOKE AND FIRE DAMPERS (MSFD) ARE RE-

QUIRED 

 
i.  Main HVAC ducts and air-transfer openings penetrating main 1 hour or more 

fire rated shaft of the building, branching out to serve each floor. 
Entire smoke control ducts, as required by the smoke management strategy. 

ii. 

8.  FIRE DAMPERS 

 
 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 797 of 1348 

 

Table 10.1.: Components of Smoke Control and HVAC Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

5.    ACTUATION OF FIRE DAMPER 
 
i. 

The fire damper actuation device shall meet the following requirements:                                                                                                                                                     
a. MSFD actuation shall be through the smoke control panel or HVAC panel 
or FACP, depending on the design strategy.                                                                                                           
b. The fusible link operating temperature shall be approximately 50°F (10°C) 
above the normal temperature within the duct system, but not less than 
160°F (71°C).                                                                                              
c. The operating temperature shall be not more than 350°F (177°C) where 
located in a smoke control system. 

8.  FIRE DAMPERS 

 
 
 

Figure 10.8.: Fire dampers provided in ducts penetration through fire compartments. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 798 of 1348 
 
 
 

 

 

Figure 10.9.: Fire dampers (FD) and Smoke Damper (SD) in various penetrations 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 799 of 1348 

 
 
 
 
9.  SMOKE 

ITEMS 

DAMPERS 

 

Table 10.1.: Components of Smoke Control and HVAC Systems 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  GENERAL 
 
i. 

Smoke dampers shall be installed and maintained in accordance with NFPA 105, 
Standard for the Installation of Smoke Door Assemblies and Other Opening Protec-
tives or as per Section 6 requirements. 
Smoke dampers shall be motorized and controlled by an automatic alarm-initiated 
device. 

ii. 

ii. 

 
2.    AREAS WHERE SMOKE DAMPERS ARE REQUIRED 
 
i.  HVAC duct branching serving apartments, dwelling units, health care sleeping units, 
class rooms, detention and correction cells shall be provided with smoke dampers. 
Smoke dampers shall be installed at or adjacent to the point where air ducts pass 
through required smoke barriers, but in no case shall a smoke damper be installed 
more than 0.6 m from the barrier, or after the first air duct inlet or outlet, whichev-
er is closer to the smoke barrier. 
If the air-handling equipment is serving  more than one floor then smoke dampers 
shall be installed in systems with a capacity greater than 7080 L/s (15,000 ft3/min) 
to isolate the air-handling equipment, including filters, from the remainder of the 
system on both the building supply and return sides, in order to restrict the circula-
tion of smoke. 

iii. 

iv.  Smoke dampers used for the protection of openings in smoke barriers or in engi-

neered smoke-control systems shall be classified in accordance with ANSI/UL 555S, 
Standard for Safety Smoke Dampers and with a minimum Class II leakage rating, and 
elevated temperature rating shall not be less than 250°C or as per Section 6 require-
ments. 

 
3.    AREAS WHERE SMOKE DAMPERS ARE NOT REQUIRED 
 
i.  Where ducts or air-transfer openings are part of an engineered smoke control sys-

tem and the smoke damper will interfere with the operation of a smoke control sys-
tem. 

ii.  Where the air in ducts continues to move and the air handling system installed is 

arranged to prevent the recirculation of exhaust or return air under fire emergency 
conditions. 

iii.  Where the air inlet or outlet openings in ducts are limited to a single smoke com-

partment. 

iv.  Where ducts penetrate floors that serve as smoke barriers. 
v.  Where ducts penetrate smoke barriers forming a communicating space separation 

in fully sprinklered building.  

Entire smoke control ducts, as required by the smoke management strategy. 

 
4.    AREAS WHERE MOTORIZED SMOKE AND FIRE DAMPERS ARE REQUIRED 
 
i. 
 
5.    ACTUATION OF SMOKE DAMPER 
 
i. 

The smoke damper shall be activated by an approved smoke detector or detectors 
installed in any of the following methods.                                                                                    
a.  Where a smoke damper is installed within a duct, a smoke detector shall be in-
stalled in the duct within 1524 mm of the damper with no air outlets or inlets be-
tween the detector and the damper.                                                                                      
b.  Where a smoke damper is installed above smoke barrier doors in a smoke barri-
er, a spot-type detector listed for releasing service shall be installed on either side 
of the smoke barrier door opening.                                                                                      
c. Through FACP                                                                                   

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 800 of 1348 

ITEMS 

 

Table 10.1.: Components of Smoke Control and HVAC Systems 

REQUIREMENTS 

c. Where a smoke damper is installed within an air transfer opening in a 
wall, a spot-type detector listed for releasing service shall be installed 
within 1524 mm horizontally of the damper.                                                                                                                 
d. Where a smoke damper is installed in a corridor wall or ceiling, the 
damper shall be permitted to be activated by a smoke detector in that 
corridor.                                                                                                                                               
e.  Where a total-coverage smoke detector system is provided within 
areas served by a HVAC system, smoke dampers shall be activated by 
smoke detection system. 

10.  COMBINATION 

(SMOKE/FIRE)  
DAMPERS 

1.  GENERAL 
 
i.  Where the smoke barrier is also constructed and serving as Fire barrier/
Wall, a combination (Smoke/Fire) Damper shall be installed for all Ducts 
and air-transfer openings penetrating such barriers/Walls. 

 
2.    ACTUATION OF COMBINATION DAMPERS 
 
i. 

The actuating device operating temperature shall be approximately 50°F 
(10°C) above the normal temperature within the duct system, but not 
less than 160°F (71°C).  
The actuating device operating temperature shall be not more than 
350°F (177°C) where located in a smoke control system. 

ii. 

iii.  A combination of fire/smoke dampers installed in smoke control system 
shaft penetrations shall not be activated by a local area smoke detection 
unless it is secondary to the smoke management system controls. 

i.  Whether it is a dedicated smoke control system or HVAC system config-
ured to provide smoke control features, an approved, dedicated Smoke 
Control Panel shall be provided for the Smoke Control Systems for Fire 
fighter’s controlled operation.  
Such SCP shall be essentially located at the Emergency Command Cen-
ter or the agreed and approved location where the Main Fire Alarm 
Control Panel is located. 

ii. 

iii.  The SCP (Smoke Control Panel) shall be with graphic displays, clearly 
depicting the building layout, location and working status of smoke-
control systems and equipment such as Ducts, Fans and Dampers within 
the building, Smoke zones within the building etc. 

iv.  The SCP should provide the control capability over all smoke-control 

v. 

system equipment or zones within the building to enable fire fighters to 
readily understand the operation of the system, to activate or isolate 
certain zones or individual equipment based on their judgment of the 
emergency situation. 
SCP shall essentially have a minimum of these features                                                   
a. Fan ON-AUTO-OFF                                                                                                            
b. Dampers OPEN-AUTO-CLOSE                                                                                          
C. Visual indication of WHITE for Fans, Dampers-NORMAL                                               
d. Visual indication of RED for Fans-OFF, Dampers-CLOSED                                       
e. Visual indication of GREEN for Fans-ON, Dampers-OPEN                                           
f. Visual indication of AMBER for Fans-TROUBLE, Dampers TROUBLE 

vi.  The control functions of the SCP shall override any automatic functions 
in the Smoke Control System. See Section 6 for approval requirements. 

11. SMOKE CONTROL 

PANEL (SCP OR FIRE 
FIGHTER’S SMOKE 
CONTROL STATION) 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 801 of 1348 

2.3.  Requirements for HVAC Systems 

2.3.1.  HVAC Systems shall comply with Table 10.2.  The relevant components of HVAC sys-

tems shall comply with Table 10.1.  Components of Smoke Control and HVAC Sys-
tems. 

 
 
 

Table 10.2.: Requirements for HVAC Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  GENERAL 

i. 

In a Fire Condition, HVAC Systems in a building shall automatically shut 
down, unless they are integral part of a Smoke exhaust and Smoke control 
systems.  

ii.  HVAC Equipment shall be arranged to provide a minimum 600 mm horizontal 

access with a minimum 2030 mm headroom for inspection, maintenance, 
and repair. 

iii.  HAVC equipment shall be guarded for personnel protection and against the 

intake of foreign matter into the system.  

iv.  Each air distribution system shall be provided with at least one manually op-
erable means for stopping the operation of the supply, return, and exhaust 
fan(s) in an emergency. 
The means of manual operation shall be located in the emergency command 
center or in a dedicated protected room. 

v. 

vi.  Exit passageways, stairs, ramps, and other exits shall not be used as a part of 

a supply, return, or exhaust air system serving other areas of the building. 
vii.  Egress corridors in health care, detention and correctional, and residential 

occupancies shall not be used as a portion of a supply, return, or exhaust air 
system serving adjoining areas. 

viii.  An air transfer opening(s) shall not be permitted in walls or in doors sepa-

rating egress corridors from adjoining areas. 

2.  DUCT INTEGRITY 

i. 

Air ducts shall be located where they are not subject to damage or rupture, 
or they shall be protected to maintain their integrity. 

ii.  Where an air duct is located outdoors, the air duct, together with its covering 

or lining, shall be protected from harmful elements. 

iii.  The ductwork should not be continuous through a partition opening but in-

stead should connect on each side of the partition to a damper installed in a 
sleeve or frame secured by perimeter-mounting angles on both sides of the 
opening, or be installed per the listing of the device. 

3.  INLET AND                            

i. 

OUTLET                          
LOCATIONS 

Air outlets shall be located at least 76 mm (3 in.) above the floor, unless pro-
visions have been made to prevent dirt and dust accumulations from enter-
ing the system. 

ii.  Air outlets, where located less than 2.13 m above the floor, outlet openings 
shall be protected by a grille or screen having openings through which a 12.7 
mm sphere cannot pass. 

iii.  Air inlets shall be located at least 76 mm (3 in.) above the floor, unless provi-
sions have been made to prevent dirt and dust accumulations from entering 
the system. 

iv.  Where located less than 2.13 m above the floor, inlet openings shall be pro-

tected by a grille or screen having openings through which a 12.7 mm sphere 
cannot pass. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 802 of 1348 

 

ITEMS 

4. SHAFTS 

Table 10.2.: Requirements for HVAC Systems 

REQUIREMENTS 

Shafts shall be 1 hour fire resistance rated for Lowrise buildings. 
Shafts shall be 2 hours fire resistance rated for non lowrise buildings. 

i. 
ii. 
iii.  Shafts used for air ducts shall not accommodate the following,                                        

a. Exhaust ducts used for the removal of smoke- and grease-laden vapors 
from cooking equipment                                                                                                                 
b. Ducts used for the removal of flammable vapors                                                                   
c. Ducts used for moving, conveying, or transporting stock, vapor, or dust                    
d. Ducts used for the removal of nonflammable corrosive fumes and vapors 
e. Refuse and linen chutes                                                                                                             
f. Piping, except for noncombustible piping conveying water or other nonhaz-
ardous or nontoxic materials                                                                                                           
g. Combustible storage 

The installation of electrical wiring and equipment associated with HVAC and 
smoke control systems shall be in accordance with NFPA 70, National Electri-
cal Code. See Section 6. for cable fire rating. 

Each air distribution system shall be provided with at least one manually op-
erable means for stopping the operation of the supply, return and exhaust 
fan(s) in an emergency. 
The means of manual operation shall be located next to smoke control panel 
or HVAC panel or FACP. 

Listed and approved air duct smoke detectors shall be installed at                                  
a. Downstream of the air filters and ahead of any branch connections in air 
supply systems having a capacity greater than 944 L/sec (2000 ft3/min)                                                                                                                           
b.  At each story prior to the connection to a common return and prior to any 
recirculation or fresh air inlet connection in air return systems having a ca-
pacity greater than 7080 L/sec (15,000 ft3/min) and serving more than one 
story. 
Smoke detectors shall automatically stop their respective fan(s) when de-
tecting the presence of smoke, unless they are required not to stop the fan 
by a smoke control logic. 

5.  WIRING 

i. 

6.  MANUAL               

i. 

OPERATION 

ii. 

i. 

7.  AIR DUCT 

SMOKE                     
DETECTORS 

ii. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 803 of 13482.4.  Various Smoke Control Approaches 

 
2.4.1.  The smoke control Strategy in a facility is broadly classified into two categories.                                                                             

a. Smoke Containment                                                                                                                                
b. Smoke Management  

 
2.4.2.  Smoke Containment           
 

2.4.2.1.  The design objective of a smoke containment approach is to restrict the 
smoke to its zone of origin and prevent it from spreading to other zones 
and areas, thus                                                                                                                                                     
a. Limiting the spread of toxic gases that can affect occupants, before and 
during evacuation.                                                                                                    
b. Allowing sufficient visibility to the Civil Defence to approach, locate and 
extinguish the fire.                                                                                                                   
c. Limiting smoke damage to build-
ing contents. 

Did You Know? 

 
2.4.2.2.  Smoke containment is achieved 
through pressure differences in 
zones, where smoke is prevent-
ed from entering a zone with a 
relatively higher pressure than 
the pressure of the zone of 
smoke origin.    

 
2.4.2.3.  Design pressure differences 

The major Factors that affect 
Smoke movement in any building 
are 

1.Stack Effect 

  Stack effect and reverse stack 

effect are the vertical air move-
ments resulting from air density 
differences between the build-
ing spaces, interior or exterior. 
This effect can cause smoke 
from fires to spread between 
floors of tall buildings through 
vents, stairs, and other shafts.  

  High-temperature smoke from a 

fire has a buoyancy (thrust) 
force due to its reduced density 
causing the expansion of smoke, 
which drives smoke from its 
origin to various paths. 

among the smoke zones shall be 
based on the following.                                  
a. Smoke zone is sprinklered or 
non sprinklered.                                           
b. The height of the ceiling in 
the smoke zone.                                           
c. Maximum and minimum 
pressure differentials.                                                                                                                                                                                                

2.Buoyancy and Expansion  

                                                                                                                                                                                                 
2.4.2.4.  Smoke containment Systems 

shall be one or a combination of 
the following systems, based on 
the building smoke control 
strategy.   

                                                                                                                                    
a.  Stairwell Pressurization System  
b.  Zoned Smoke Control System       
c.  Elevator Pressurization System      
d.  Lobby (Vestibule) Pressurization System    
e.  Smoke Refuge Area Pressurization System 
f.    Opposed airflow to prevent smoke movement between large volume 

space and communicating space 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 804 of 1348 
2.4.3.  Smoke Management           
 

2.4.3.1.  The design objective of the smoke management approach is to                                                      

a. Maintain the tenable condition, where large unoccupied spaces and un-
occupied volumes are used as smoke reservoir for a specific time or extract 
and exhaust the smoke to achieve a smoke layer interface at a height 
which does not expose occupants to smoke and thus enabling their egress 
from that space unaffected.                                                                                                          
b. Mechanical smoke exhaust to remove smoke from a space to slow the 
rate of smoke layer decent for a period that allows occupants to safely 
egress from space.                                                                                                                     
c. Smoke purging, post fire incident, to minimize the smoke damage to the 
building interior. 

                                          
2.4.3.2.  Smoke Management Systems shall be engineered Smoke control systems 

and shall include the following evaluations in a building.                                                 
a. Fire Dynamics                                                                                                                            
b. Fire Size and Location                                                                                                          
c. Materials likely to burn                                                                                                         
d. Fire plume geometry                                                                                                        
e. Smoke layer impact on means of egress                                                                             
f. Tenability conditions during the period of occupant egress                                      
g. Response and performance of building systems, including passive barri-
ers, automatic sprinkler systems, automatic detection systems and smoke 
control                                                                                                                                       
h.  Response time required for building occupants to reach building exits, 
time required to exit through large volumes such as atria. 

 
2.4.3.3.  Smoke Management Systems shall be one or a combination of the fol-

lowing systems, based on the building smoke control strategy.                                                                               
a. Atrium or large volume Smoke Control System                                              
b. Smoke Extraction System                                                                                   
c. Corridor and Open circulation area Smoke Purging System                                                                                               
d. Natural Ventilation System                                                                                    
e. Mechanical Ventilation System 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 805 of 1348 

2.5.  General Requirements for Smoke Control Systems 

2.5.1.  Smoke Control Systems shall comply with the general requirements of Table 10.3.  
The relevant components of Smoke Control systems shall comply with Table 10.1. 
Components of Smoke Control and HVAC Systems. 

 

Table 10.3.: General Requirements for Smoke Control Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  DESIGN FIRE 

i. 

SIZE HEAT                 
OUTPUT 
(DESIGN FIRE 
LOAD) 

ii. 

The building to be provided with an engineered smoke control system shall be 
sprinkler protected unless an engineering analysis is provided with technical jus-
tifications and approved by Civil Defence. 
The design fire load over 9.3 m2 floor space shall be restricted to the following 
and shall be detailed and justified in the smoke engineering analysis.                            
a. Office building atrium- fire load shall be 2.1 MW at 12 m of fire perimeter.                                                  
b. Shops and mercantile-fire load shall be 5 MW at 14 m of fire perimeter.                 
c. Hotel guest rooms-fire load shall be 0.5 MW at 6 m of fire perimeter.                       
d. Hotel Public Areas-fire load shall be 2.5 MW at 12 m of fire perimeter.                      
e. Assembly with fixed seating-fire load of 2.5 MW at 12 m of fire perimeter.                                                      
f. Malls and Atrium smoke engineering analysis shall be done by use of computer 
models. 

2.  MINIMUM                   

i. 

DESIGN                     
PRESSURE                    
DIFFERENCE 

ii. 

The minimum allowable pressure difference across the boundaries of smoke 
control zones shall be as per Table 10.3.a. 
The pressure difference across a barrier must not result in door-opening forces 
that exceed the maximum force of 133 N. 

iii.  The maximum allowable pressure difference (ΔP) across the door shall be in ac-

cordance with Table 10.3.b. 

iv.  The makeup air shall not cause door-opening force to exceed allowable 

limits. 

Table 10.3.a.: Minimum Design Pressure Differences Across Smoke Zones 

BUILDING 

CEILING HEIGHT 

MINIMUM DESIGN PRESSURE DIFFERENCE 

1.  SPRINKLERED 

2. NON-SPRINKLERED 

Any 

3 m 

3. NON-SPRINKLERED 

4.5 m 

4. NON-SPRINKLERED 

6.5 m 

0.05 w.g. (12.5 Pa) 

0.10 w.g. (25 Pa) 

0.14 w.g. (35 Pa) 

0.18 w.g. (45 Pa) 

Table 10.3.b.: Maximum Allowable Design Pressure Differences Across Door 

DOOR CLOSER 
FORCE (N) 

DOOR WIDTH 

DOOR WIDTH 

DOOR WIDTH 

DOOR WIDTH 

DOOR WIDTH 

0.81 m 

0.91 m 

1.0 m 

1.11 m 

1.22 m 

1.  25 N 

2. 30 N 

3. 35 N 

4. 40 N 

5. 45 N 

6. 50 N 

7. 55 N 

8. 60 N 

 

113 Pa 

108 Pa 

103 Pa 

98 Pa 

92 Pa 

87 Pa 

82 Pa 

77 Pa 

102 Pa 

97 Pa 

93 Pa 

88 Pa 

83 Pa 

78 Pa 

74 Pa 

69 Pa 

92 Pa 

88 Pa 

83 Pa 

79 Pa 

75 Pa 

71 Pa 

66 Pa 

62 Pa 

84 Pa 

80 Pa 

77 Pa 

73 Pa 

69 Pa 

65 Pa 

61 Pa 

57 Pa 

78 Pa 

74 Pa 

71 Pa 

67 Pa 

64 Pa 

60 Pa 

56 Pa 

53 Pa 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 806 of 1348 

 

Table 10.3.: General Requirements for Smoke Control Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

3.  MAKE-UP AIR 

i.  Makeup air for smoke management systems shall be provided by fans or by 

(REPLACEMENT 
AIR) 

openings to the outside. 

ii.  Where wall fire rating is required to be ensured by other sections of this 

code, make up air through openings to the outside, penetrating fire rated 
walls, shall not be acceptable. 

iii.  The design replacement air discharge velocity shall not exceed 5.0 m/s to 

prevent the escapees being hindered by the air flow.  

iv.  The replacement air intake shall be sited at least 5 m away from any exhaust 

v. 

air discharge. 
The supply points for the makeup air (Replacement air) shall be located be-
neath the smoke layer interface, unless otherwise determined by computer 
model analysis. 

vi.  The replacement air shall be discharged at a low level, at least 1.5 m beneath 
the designed smoke layer, to prevent smoke logging of the lower clear zone. 
See Figure 10.10. for illustrations. 

vii.  Where the inlet cannot be sited at least 1.5 m below the smoke layer, a 

smoke curtain or a barrier shall be used to prevent replacement air distorting 
the smoke layer.  

viii.  Such smoke curtain depth shall be 20% of the total height of the space. 
ix.  Where replacement air is taken through inlet air ventilators or doorways, 

devices shall be incorporated to automatically open such inlet ventilators and 
doors to admit replacement air upon activation of the smoke ventilation sys-
tem. 
The mechanical makeup air shall be less than the mass flow rate of the me-
chanical smoke exhaust. 

x. 

Figure 10.10.: Smoke curtain used in relation to replacement air  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 807 of 1348 

 

Table 10.3.: General Requirements for Smoke Control Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

i. 
4.  MINIMUM                

DESIGN SMOKE 
LAYER DEPTH 

ii. 

The minimum design depth of the smoke layer for a smoke management sys-
tem shall be either of the following:                                                                                             
a. Twenty percent of the floor-to-ceiling height                                                                       
b. Based on an engineering analysis 
The design smoke layer base shall be above the heads of people escaping 
beneath it. The minimum height shall be 1830 mm. See Figure 10.11. for il-
lustrations. 

iii.  Smoke reservoirs to prevent the lateral spread of smoke and to collect smoke 
for removal shall be approved smoke curtains or screens of non-combustible 
construction capable of withstanding smoke temperatures. See Figure 10.12. 
for illustrations. 

Figure 10.11: Clear smoke layer 

Figure 10.12.: Smoke reservoir 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 808 of 1348 

 

Table 10.3.: General Requirements for Smoke Control Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

5.  EMERGENCY 

POWER 

6.  CIRCUIT            
PROTECTION 

i. 

ii. 

i. 

All the smoke control systems shall be provided with a secondary source of 
power supply. 
Such emergency backup power supply shall be calculated for the entire 
smoke control equipment that is required to activate as smoke control strat-
egy. 

The fans and associated smoke control equipment shall be wired a with 2 
hour fire-resistance rating and protected circuits designed to ensure a contin-
ued operation in the event of the fire. See Section 6. for cable details. 

ii.  Where fire resistance rated wiring is not used for smoke control systems, 

wiring shall be in 2 hour fire resistance rated shafts. 

iii.  Metal conduits in lieu of 2 hour fire resistance rating shall not be acceptable. 
iv.  The electrical supply to the fans shall, in any case, be connected to a sub-

main circuit exclusive thereto after the main isolator of the building.  

7.  SYSTEM           
ACTIVATION 

i. 

The smoke control system shall be activated by a sprinkler activation, smoke 
detectors or beam detectors located in the same smoke control zone.  

ii.  Delay in smoke control system activation with respect to sprinkler system 

activation shall be permitted, provided justified by an engineering analysis. 

iii.  Use of smoke or beam detectors for activation must be carefully designed so 

that accidental or premature activation of the detectors on a non-fire zone 
due to smoke spills or spread from other areas can be avoided.  

iv.  A remote manual activation and control switches (Smoke Control Panel, SCP, 

See Table 10.1.11.) as well as a visual indication of the operation status of 
the smoke control system shall also be provided at the fire command center 
or at main fire alarm panel. 

v.  The time taken for the smoke control system within a smoke zone to 
be fully operational shall not exceed 60 seconds from system activa-
tion. 

8.  HVAC                    

i. 

SHUTDOWN 

The air-conditioning and ventilation systems (HVAC Systems) within part of 
the fire zone shall be shut down automatically upon activation of the smoke 
control system. 

ii.  The automatic shut down of the air handling Unit shall not affect the dedicat-

ed and independent ventilation system of the following areas:                                           
a. Exit staircases and exit passageways.                                                                      
b. Smoke free lobbies and fire fighting lobbies.                                                          
c. Lift shafts.                                                                                                                      
d. Areas of refuge                                                                                                              
e. Basement carparks.                                                                                                      
f. Emergency command center.                                                                                     
g. Flammable and hazardous material storage.                                                            
h. Emergency generator room.                                                                                             
i. Fire pump room 

9. HVAC USAGE 

i.  Where justified by design and engineering analysis, HVAC system shall be 
permitted to be active and part of the smoke control zoning supply air re-
quirements, provided the components of such HVAC systems comply with          
Table 10.1.3.2. Smoke Control Systems Ducts. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 809 of 1348 

2.6.  Stair Pressurization System 

2.6.1.  The stair pressurization system shall comply with the general requirements for 

smoke control systems as per Section 2.5 and Table 10.4., Stair pressurization re-
quirements. 

 
 

Table 10.4.: Stair Pressurization Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  GENERAL 

i. 

To limit smoke from entering the stairwell through the supply air intake, the sup-
ply air intake shall be separated from all building exhausts, outlets from smoke 
shafts, roof smoke, heat vents, open vents from elevator shafts, and other build-
ing openings that might expel smoke from the building in a fire. 

ii.  Where air intakes are positioned in the façade or at a roof level there shall be 
two air intakes, spaced apart and facing different directions in such a manner 
that they could not be directly downwind of the same source of smoke.  

iii.  Each such inlet shall be independently capable of providing the full air require-

ments of the system. Each inlet shall be protected by an independently operated 
smoke control damper system in such a way that if one damper closes due to 
smoke contamination, the other inlet will supply the air requirements of the sys-
tem without interruption. The discharge point of a smoke ventilation duct shall 
be a minimum of 1 m above the air intake.  

iv.  An override switch to reopen the closed damper and to close the open damper 

v. 

shall be provided at the smoke control panel (SCP). 
The calculations shall take into account the 2 (two) number of doors to be 
opened simultaneously, one door at the floor of fire origin and the exit door at 
discharge as a minimum. However, pressurization sizing shall be verified by Com-
puter airflow models. 

vi.  For stair pressurization systems in super highrise buildings special design provi-
sion shall be made taking into consideration the stack effect and the airflow re-
sistance of the stair on pressure profile within the staircase.  

vii.  For stairs pressurization systems in super Highrise buildings shall be determined 

either by analytical calculations, network modeling or CFD simulations that de-
sign pressure differences can be achieved taking into consideration stack effect 
and airflow resistance of the stair.  

viii.  The stair pressurization can be either bottom fed or top fed. To avoid contamina-
tion of air intakes with smoke, it is recommended to apply bottom fed systems or 
alternatively to use two air intakes. 

ix.  Supply air for the pressurization system shall be drawn directly from the external 

and its intake shall not be less than 5 m from any exhaust discharge openings. 

2.  SINGLE AND 

i. 

MULTIPLE                  
INJECTIONS 

In order to achieve an even pressure profile within the super highrise building, 
the stair shall be either divided into sections not higher than 90 m or provided 
with a compensated pressurization system counteracting the stack effect. 

ii.  A single-point injection system shall be permitted to be used where the stairwell 

height is less than 30.5 m. See Figure 10.13. & Figure 10.14. for illustrations. 

iii.  Stairwells more than 30.5 m high shall be provided with multiple-injection sys-

tems. See Figure 10.15. for illustrations. 

 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 810 of 1348 

 

Table 10.4.: Stair Pressurization Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

3.  HEIGHT                          

i. 

LIMITATION 

ii. 

For some tall stairwells, an acceptable pressurization may not be achieved due to 
the impact of the indoor to outdoor temperature differences. This is more likely 
with systems equipped with a treated supply air than those with untreated sup-
ply air.  
The height limit is the height above which acceptable pressurization is not possi-
ble for an ideal building. For standard atmospheric pressure at sea level, the 
height limit is 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
iii.     If the height limit (Hm) is greater than the height of a stairwell, acceptable pres-

surization is possible. 

i. 

ii. 

The air velocity at the supply air inlet for the stair pressurization system shall not 
exceed 5 m/s. 
To keep pressurized space clear of smoke contamination air velocity through the 
open door between the pressurized and unpressurized spaces on the floor of fire 
origin shall not be less than 1.0 m/s.  

iii.  To achieve the required air velocity it is essential to provide properly designed air 

release from the floor of fire origin. 

4. AIR             
VELOCITY 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 811 of 1348 

 

Figure 10.13: Stair Pressurization by  

Roof-Mounted Propeller Fan. 

Figure 10.14.: Stair Pressurization by  

Top Injection Centrifugal Fan 

  Did You 
Know? 

   The Airtightness 

of the building       
façade system 
can significantly 
influence the              
pressure profile 
within the                
building.  

Figure 10.15.: Stair Pressurization by Multiple Injection with Roof-Mounted Fan.  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 812 of 1348 

 

Table 10.4.: Stair Pressurization Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

5.  PRESSURE               

i. 

DIFFERENTIAL 

Exit stair pressurization systems shall be designed to operate within a pres-
sure difference range. This range is between the minimum design pressure 
difference and the maximum design pressure difference. The maximum de-
sign pressure shall corresponds to the maximum allowable door-opening 
force depending on the door size. See Table 10.3.b. 

ii.  Where the system designer has determined that a higher minimum pressure 

difference is necessary to achieve the smoke control system objectives, the 
higher minimum pressure difference shall be used. 

iii.  The minimum pressure difference for exit stair pressurization systems shall 

be established at a level that is sufficient such that it will not be overcome by 
the forces of wind, stack effect, or buoyancy of hot smoke. 

iv.  For exit stair pressurization systems, the orifice equation can be used to esti-
mate the flow through building flow paths. The total leakage area of the pro-
tected space shall be calculated using input data from NFPA 92, EN 12101-6 
standards or other relevant standards.  

 
 
 
 
 
 

6. FORCE ON DOOR 

i. 

ii. 

The flow through open doors shall be calculated based on the pressure 
difference across the open doors. 
The pressure difference across a barrier must not result in door-opening forc-
es that exceed the maximum force of 133 N. 

iii.  The force required to open a door in an exit stair pressurization system is as 

follows: 

 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 813 of 1348 

 

Table 10.4.: Stair Pressurization Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

7.  AIR LEAKAGE 

AND PRESSURE 
DIFFERENCE 
REGULATION 
(RELIEF) 

i.  The rate of supply of pressurized air to the pressurized areas shall be suffi-
cient to make up for the loss through leakages into the unpressurised sur-
roundings. 

ii.  One of the following methods shall be provided to control the overpressure 

in the pressurized stairwell:                                                                                                       
a. Outdoor overpressure relief damper system (Outdoor relief dampers shall 
be installed in such manner to avoid negative influence of wind forces on 
pressure difference regulation.)                                                                                                 
b. Building barometric damper system .                                                                                                                         
c. Bypass system                                                                                                                                        
d. Variable-air-volume (VAV) system (subject to engineering analysis on how 
this can be commissioned). Variable-air-volume (VAV) systems shall not be 
applied unless all pressure regulating electronic components e.g. frequency 
inverters, pressure sensors, motorized pressure regulating dampers etc. are 
continuously monitored and its condition is indicated on the control board in 
order to detect and locate possible failure.) 

8.  EQUIPMENT 

i.  Equipment and ductwork for pressurization systems shall be located at the 

AND DUCT 
WORK 

exterior of the building and directly connected to the stair enclosure by a 
ductwork enclosed in a noncombustible construction or in a 2-hour fire re-
sistance rated duct work. 

ii.  Equipment and ductwork shall be permitted to be within the building under 

the following conditions:                                                                                                                
a.  Where the equipment and ductwork are separated from the remainder of 
the building, including other mechanical equipment, by a 2-hour fire-
resistance rated construction.                                                                                                    
b. Where the building, including the stair enclosure, is protected throughout 
by an approved and supervised automatic sprinkler system, and the equip-
ment and ductwork are separated from the remainder of the building, in-
cluding other mechanical equipment, by not less than a 1-hour fire-resistive 
rating. 

9. PRESSURE                    

i.  The number and distribution of injection points for supply of pressurizing air 

DISTRIBUTION 

to the exit staircase should ensure an even pressure profile.  

ii.  The arrangement of the injection points and the control of the pressurization 

system shall be designed to restore variation in pressure difference as soon 
as practicable. 

10. ACTIVATION 

i.  The pressurization system shall be automatically activated by the building 

fire alarm system.  

ii.  Smoke control system shall be monitored and activated by a dedicated and 

listed Civil Defence approved Smoke Control Panel (SCP). 

iii.  A remote manual start-stop switch shall also be made available to firemen at 
the fire command center, or at the fire alarm control panel where there is no 
fire command center. A visual indication of the operation status of the pres-
surization system shall be provided. 

v.  For pressurized smoke proof enclosure systems, the activation of the sys-

tems shall be initiated by a smoke detector installed in an approved location 
within 3050 mm of each entrance to the smoke proof enclosure. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 814 of 1348 

 

Table 10.4.: Stair Pressurization Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

11. STAND-BY FAN 

i.  Back-up (Stand-by) fans shall not be required for stair pressurization sys-

tems. 

12. STAND-BY 

POWER 

i.  Stairwell pressurization system, Control panel, a fan shall be provided with 

emergency power. 

 

Schematic 10.16: Stair Pressurization System Schematic 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 815 of 1348 

2.7.  Atrium and Large Volume Smoke Control System 

2.7.1.  Atrium Smoke Control systems shall comply with the relevant general requirements 
for smoke control systems as per Section 2.5 and Table 10.5., Atrium and Large Vol-
ume Smoke Control System requirements. 

 

Table 10.5.: Atrium and Large Volume Smoke Control System 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  GENERAL 

i. 

Atrium spaces shall be protected by a smoke management system, designed 
in accordance with an engineering analysis and/or computational software to 
maintain tenable conditions (smoke interface layer) at a minimum height of 
1830 mm above the highest walking surface open to the atrium or floor 
which serves as part of the means of egress, for a duration of 20 minutes or 
1.5 times the calculated egress time, whichever is more.  

ii.  Where the atrium does not provide for any egress path or walkway and a 
smoke clearance from the atrium is a priority, the atrium smoke manage-
ment system should be designed to clear smoke from the atrium within 10 
minutes.  

iii.  The minimum smoke layer depth shall be 20% of the floor-to-ceiling height 
except when an engineering analysis using full scale data, scale modeling or 
CFD modeling indicates otherwise. See Figure 10.17. 

iv.  The engineering analysis for the atrium smoke management system should 

include the following elements                                                                                                   
a. Fire dynamics                                                                                                                            
b. Fire size and location                                                                                                                
c. Materials likely to be burning                                                                                                    
d. Fire plume geometry                                                                                                                
e. Fire plume or smoke layer impact on means of egress                                                         
f. Tenability conditions during the period of occupant egress                                                
g. Response and performance of building systems, including passive barriers, 
automatic detection and extinguishing, and smoke control                                                      
h. Response time required for building occupants to reach building exits, in-
cluding any time required to exit through the atrium. 

2.  MAKE-UP AIR 

i. 

(REPLACEMENT 
AIR) 

The makeup air velocity shall not exceed 1.02 m/s where the makeup air 
could come into contact with the plume, unless a higher makeup air velocity 
is supported by an engineering analysis.  

ii.  Mechanical makeup air shall be designed to achieve 85% to 95% of the ex-
haust mass flow rate, not including the leakage through these small paths. 

iii.  Makeup air shall be provided by fans, openings to the outside leakage paths, 

or the combination thereof. 

iv.  The supply points for the makeup air shall be located beneath the smoke lay-

er interface, unless otherwise determined by computer model analysis. 

v.  Mechanical makeup air shall be less than the mass flow rate of the mechani-

cal smoke exhaust. 

vi.  The makeup air shall not cause door-opening force to exceed allowable lim-

its. 

i. 

Due to practical limitations, a smoke ventilation system shall have:                           
a. A maximum mass flow not exceeding 175 kg/s                                                                   
b. A minimum smoke layer temperature of 180C above ambient. 

3.  MAXIMUM 
MASS FLOW 
AND SMOKE 
TEMPERATURE 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 816 of 1348 

 

Table 10.5.: Atrium and Large Volume Smoke Control System 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

4.  CAPACITY OF 

i. 

FANS 

The capacity of an engineered smoke control system shall be capable of han-
dling the largest demand for smoke exhaust from the worst case scenario. In 
Figure 10.18., for example, the smoke is originating from the first level, di-
rectly below the exhaust openings. 

ii.  Another  example of the worst case scenario at atrium. In Figure 10.19., for 
example, the smoke is originating from the second level and with protruded 
obstructions from upper levels. 

iii.  Adequate arrangement(s) shall be made in each smoke reservoir for the re-

moval of smoke in a way that will prevent the formation of stagnant regions. 
See Figure 10.20. for illustrations. 

 
 
 

Figure 10.17.: Minimum Smoke Layer Depth, 20% of volume height 

Figure 10.18.: Scenario A – Fire origin at lowest Atrium level 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 817 of 1348 

 

 
 
 

Figure 10.19.: Scenario B – Fire origin at 2nd floor Shop space  

Figure 10.20.: Stagnant region due to atrium ceiling obstruction 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 818 of 1348 

Table 10.5.: Atrium and Large Volume Smoke Control System 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

i. 

Smoke screens or listed smoke curtains shall be provided strategically to chan-
nel the smoke towards the atrium volume and towards the extract fans. See 
Figure 10.21. for few illustrations of smoke screen or curtain arrangements. 

ii.  Where glass walls or panels are being used as smoke screens to form a smoke 

reservoir or as channeling screens, they shall be 1 hour fire rated or shall be 
provided with closely spaced draft sprinklers. See Figure 10.21.  for illustrations. 

5.  SMOKE 

SCREENS 

 

Figure 10.21.: Smoke or Channeling Screens  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 819 of 1348 

 

Table 10.5.: Atrium and Large Volume Smoke Control System 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

6.  COMMUNICATING 

i. 
SPACES AND                    
CONVENIENCE 
OPENINGS 

Convenience Openings and communicating spaces shall not require an 
atrium smoke management system. However, any of the following meth-
ods shall be implemented to prevent smoke spread to the communi-
cating spaces or convenience openings.                                                                                       
a. Maintaining the smoke layer interface at a level higher than that of the 
highest opening of the communicating space.                                                          
b. Providing a smoke barrier to limit the smoke spread into the com-
municating space.                                                                                                                           
c.  Providing an opposed airflow through the opening to prohibit smoke 
spread into the communicating space.                                                                             
d. Providing smoke screens as per Table 10.5.5. 

7. CLEAR LAYER 

i. 

The design smoke layer base shall be above the heads of people escaping 
beneath it. The minimum height shall be 1830mm.  

8.  SYSTEM                        

i. 

ACTIVATION 

ii. 

Atrium Smoke Control Systems shall be independently activated by each 
of the following:                                                                                                                                 
a. Required automatic sprinkler system and smoke detectors (which ever 
activated first)                                                                                                                                 
b. Manual controls that are readily accessible to the fire department. 
For large spaces where smoke stratification can occur, one of the follow-
ing detection means shall be used:                                                                                              
a. Beam-type smoke detector(s) aimed at an upward angle to intersect 
the smoke layer regardless of the level of stratification.                                                               
b. Horizontally mounted beam-type smoke detector(s) located at the 
ceiling with additional beam-type smoke detector(s) located at other 
levels in the volume to cover any identified unconditioned (dead air) 
spaces.                                                                                                                                
c. Horizontally mounted beam-type smoke detector(s) located below the 
lowest expected level of stratification.                                                                                       
d. Aspiration (air sampling) smoke detection system. 

iii.  A means of manually starting and stopping the smoke management sys-
tem shall be provided with the Smoke Control Panel (SCP) at the emer-
gency command center. 

9. STAND-BY FAN 

i.  Back-up (Stand-by) fans shall not be required for atrium and large vol-

ume smoke management systems. 

10. STAND-BY POWER 

i.  Atrium smoke management system, Control panel, automatic Smoke 

curtains and fans shall be provided with the emergency power. 

 
 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 820 of 1348 
 
 
 

 

 

Schematic 10.22.: Atrium Smoke Control System Schematic 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 821 of 1348 

2.8.  Corridor and Open Circulation Spaces Smoke Management 

System 

2.8.1.  Corridor and Open circulation spaces shall comply with the relevant general require-

ments for smoke control systems as per Section 2.5 and corridor and open spaces 
smoke management requirements of Table 10.6.  

Table 10.6.: Corridor and Open Circulation Spaces Smoke Purging System 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  GENERAL 

i. 

ii. 

Corridor and open circulation areas shall be provided with mechanical smoke 
purge with a mechanical system. 
The intent of the smoke purge system is for the smoke removal for firefighting 
operations during and after fire. 

iii.  Any door of a premise accessible to the public, such as exit and corridor doors, 
not located between an air supply inlet and a smoke extraction outlet, must be 
at most 5 m distant to one of them.  

iv.  At the same zone or level, several circulations or sections of inlet and outlet 
cannot be connected by the same ductwork, unless they make up only one 
smoke extraction zone. 

2. FANS 

3. DESIGN         

CRITERIA 

i. 

i. 

Smoke extract fans shall comply with Table 10.1. and shall be approved for 
effective operation at 4000C for 2 hour. 

Corridor smoke purge mechanical system shall be capable of achieving a mini-
mum of 6 air changes per hour. (6 ACH). 

4.  MAKE-UP AIR 

i.  Mechanical air supply inlets are carried out through air inlets connected to a 

(REPLACEMENT 
AIR) 

supply fan.  

ii.  Mechanical air supply inlets shall achieve a minimum 85% airflow rate of the 

extract.  

iii.  Air velocity through air supply inlets shall be lower than 5 m/s.   
iv.  These various air inlets and outlets shall be equipped with closed dampers in 

their waiting (non-fire mode) position. 

v.  Makeup air shall be provided by fans or openings to the outside or leakage 

paths, or the combination thereof. 

vi.  The supply points for the makeup air shall be located beneath the smoke layer 

interface. 

vii.  Mechanical makeup air shall be less than the mass flow rate of the mechanical 

smoke exhaust. 

viii.  The makeup air shall not cause door-opening force to exceed allowable limits. 
ix. 

It is preferable for air supply inlets to have their lower part at least 300 mm 
above the floor and their highest part at most 1 m above the floor. Supply inlet 
shall have removable grille for easy actuator access from inlet face. 

x.  Air supply inlets shall preferably be located in close proximity to firestop doors 

xi. 

and access doors to staircases.  
If the air supply inlet is carried out through exterior opening flaps, their free 
surface shall be in the lower half of the premise. See Figure 10.24. for illustra-
tions. However, where the fire rating of such exterior surface needs to be 
maintained, make up air opening flaps on such surfaces shall not be accepta-
ble. 

i. 
5. EXTRACT                  

OUTLETS 

ii. 

 

Air supply inlets and smoke extraction outlets shall be distributed alternately, 
such that the horizontal distance between the supply and extraction, meas-
ured along the axis of circulation, should not exceed 15 m. 
Smoke extraction outlets shall have their lower part at least 1.830 m above 
the floor and be located entirely within the higher third-part of the circulation; 
See Figure 10.24. for illustrations. Extraction outlet should have removable 
grille for easy actuator access from outer face.  

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 822 of 1348 

 

 

Figure 10.23.: Location of Supply air inlets and Smoke extract outlets 

Schematic 10.24.: Typical Corridor and Open circulation area Mechanical Smoke Purge System 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 823 of 1348 

Table 10.6.: Corridor and Open Circulation Spaces Smoke Purging System 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

5. EXTRACT                  

i.  When a smoke extraction outlet is served by two air supply inlets, the dis-

OUTLETS 

ii. 

tances between inlets and outlets must be equivalent.  
Extract outlets shall not be located within 6 m of any exit stair or exits. See 
Figure 10.23. 

iii.  The final smoke exhaust outlets shall be outside the building to the open air, 

iv. 

and away from occupied spaces. 
In highrise and superhighrise buildings, the smoke exhaust shall not be at 
intermediate levels of the building. The smoke exhaust shall only be from 
roof, open to sky. Make up air is permitted to be drawn from intermediate 
levels. See Figure 10.25.b. 

6.  SYSTEM              

ACTIVATION 

i. 

The smoke purge systems shall be automatically activated by the Sprinkler 
Flow switch and/or smoke detection systems serving the corridor zone or 
open circulation area zone.  
The automatic activation of the purge system by means of a cross zoned sys-
tem (activation of two detection devices) shall be preferred and permitted.  
iii.  Means for the manual operation of the smoke purge system with the Smoke 

ii. 

Control Panel (SCP) shall be provided at an approved location as per Table 
10.1.11, preferably at the Emergency Command Center where applicable or 
next to the main fire alarm panel.  

iv.  Each smoke exhaust fan must be able to be shut down from the manual con-

v. 

trol location. 
The control devices must ensure fans startup, within a maximum delay of 30 
seconds in order to allow the operation of all activated security devices 
(dampers and doors) ensuring smoke extraction and partitioning of the 
smoke extraction zone. 

vi.  The open or closed state of fans disconnecting switch must be monitored by 

SCP and shall be annunciated to the security station or a frequently super-
vised station.  

 

7. USAGE OF HVAC 

i. 

SYSTEM 

The building HVAC system shall be permitted for corridor or open circulation 
areas smoke extraction provided that the system adheres to the provisions of 
Section 2.8. and such system does not interfere with the natural smoke 
movement of the area.  

ii.  HVAC system used for any smoke purging objective shall be designed and 
installed with dampers in ducting network such that the activation of the  
system shall not circulate the smoke back into the air supply network and 
into the building. 

iii.  The presence of filters or sound attenuators shall be allowed on the supply 

ductwork.  

iv.  The building HVAC system shall also be permitted to achieve and enhance 
the corridor smoke purging system by establishing positive pressure differ-
ences at the adjacent zones. 

v.  Where corridors and open circulation areas are provided with  multiple ar-

rangement of systems as allowed by Table 10.6.7.ii., such zones shall be 
smoke compartments, fully separated  by smoke barriers and smoke doors. 
vi.  Any HVAC system put to service for establishing pressure differences or as 

smoke purge system shall be designed through an engineering analysis.  

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 824 of 1348 

 

Table 10.6.: Corridor and Open Circulation Spaces Smoke Purging System 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

8. STAND-BY FAN 

i.  Back-up (Stand-by) fans shall not be required for corridor and open circula-

tion area smoke management systems. 

9. STAND-BY             

i.  Corridor and open circulation area smoke management system, Control pan-

POWER 

el, automatic Smoke curtains, if any, Fans and related equipment shall be 
provided with an emergency power. 

Schematic 10.25.a.: Corridor and Open circulation area Mechanical Smoke Purge System Schematic 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 825 of 1348 

 

Schematic 10.25.b.: Smoke exhaust at intermediate levels not permitted  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 826 of 1348 

 

2.9.  Theater Smoke Management System 

2.9.1.  Theaters with legitimate stages shall comply with the relevant general requirements 

for smoke control systems as per Section 2.5 and theater smoke management re-
quirements of Table 10.7.  

 

Table 10.7.: Theater Smoke Management System 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  GENERAL 

2. FANS 

i. 

ii. 

i. 

Theaters with regular stages greater than 93 m² and legitimate stages shall 
be provided with an automatic smoke management system to provide a 
means of removing smoke and combustion gases directly to the outside in 
the event of a fire. 
The system equipment, fan wiring and ducts shall be located and protected 
to ensure a minimum of 20 minutes of operation in the event of activation. 

Smoke extract fans shall comply with Table 10.1. and shall be approved for 
an effective operation at 4000C for 2 hours. 

3. DESIGN CRITERIA  i. 

The smoke control system shall be designed to maintain the smoke level at 
not less than 1830 mm above the highest level of the theater seating or 
above the top of the proscenium opening where a proscenium wall and 
opening protection are provided.  

4.  MAKE-UP AIR 

i.  Mechanical air supply inlets shall be through air inlets connected to a supply 

(REPLACEMENT 
AIR) 

fan.  

ii.  Mechanical air supply inlets shall achieve a minimum of 85% airflow rate of 

the extract.  

iii.  The makeup air velocity shall not exceed 1.02 m/s where the makeup air 

could come into contact with the plume unless a higher makeup air velocity 
is supported by an engineering analysis.  

iv.  The supply points for the makeup air shall be located beneath the smoke lay-

er interface. 

5. FIRE CURTAIN 

i. 

ii. 

Regular stages greater than  93 m² and legitimate  stages shall be provided 
with a fire curtain approved and listed for 1 hour fire rating to separate the 
stages from rest of the seating area, during fire. 
Such fire curtain shall be activated by the sprinkler operation or the smoke 
detection from the stage zone. 

6.  SMOKE SCREENS  i. 

Smoke screens or listed smoke curtains shall be provided strategically to 
channel the smoke towards the extract fans or to achieve the smoke reser-
voir. 

i. 
7.  SYSTEM                        

ACTIVATION 

The theater smoke management system shall be activated independently by 
any of the following:                                                                                                                                             
a. Activation of the sprinkler system in the stage area.                                                      
b. Activation of Cross zoned smoke detectors over the stage area.                                
c. Operation of a manual switch  with Smoke Control Panel (SCP) at an ap-
proved location. 

ii.  A means of manually starting and stopping the smoke management system 
shall be provided with a Smoke Control Panel (SCP) at the emergency com-
mand center. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 827 of 1348 

 

Table 10.7.: Theater Smoke Management System 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

8. STAND-BY FAN 

i.  Back-up (Stand-by) fans shall not be required for theater smoke man-

agement systems. 

9. STAND-BY POWER 

i.  Theater smoke management system, Control panel, automatic Smoke 

curtains, Fan shall be provided with emergency power. 

 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 828 of 1348 

 

2.10.  Mall Smoke Management System 

2.10.1.  Mall smoke management shall comply with the relevant general requirements for 

smoke control systems as per Section 2.5 and Mall smoke management requirements 
of Table 10.8.  

 

Table 10.8.: Mall Smoke Management System 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  GENERAL 

i. 

The mall shall be protected by a smoke management system, designed in 
accordance with an engineering analysis and computational software to 
maintain tenable conditions (smoke interface layer) at a minimum height of 
1830 mm above the highest walking surface open to the atrium or floor 
which serves as part of the means of egress, for a duration of 20 minutes or 
1.5 times the calculated egress time, whichever is more.  

ii.  Where atrium and large volume is part of the mall, the smoke management 

system shall be designed for such atrium in accordance with Section 2.7.  

iii.  The minimum smoke layer depth shall be 20% of the floor-to-ceiling height 

except when an engineering analysis using full scale data, scale modeling, or 
CFD modeling indicates otherwise.  

iv.  The engineering analysis for the mall smoke management system should in-

clude the following elements                                                                                                   
a. Fire dynamics                                                                                                                            
b. Fire size and location                                                                                                                
c. Materials likely to be burning                                                                                                    
d. Fire plume geometry                                                                                                                
e. Fire plume or smoke layer impact on means of egress                                                         
f. Tenability conditions during the period of occupant egress                                                
g. Response and performance of building systems, including passive barriers, 
automatic detection, automatic suppression and smoke control                                                      
h. Response time required for building occupants to reach mall exits, includ-
ing any time required to exit through the atrium, large volumes. 

i. 

The makeup air velocity shall not exceed 1.02 m/s where the makeup air 
could come into contact with the plume, unless a higher makeup air velocity 
is supported by an engineering analysis.  
The mechanical makeup air shall be designed to achieve 85% to 95% of the 
exhaust mass flow rate, not including the leakage through these small paths. 
iii.  Makeup air shall be provided by fans, openings to the outside leakage paths, 

ii. 

or the combination thereof. 

iv.  The supply points for the makeup air shall be located beneath the smoke lay-

er interface. 

v.  The make-up air shall not cause door opening force to exceed allowable lim-

its 

i. 

Due to practical limitations, a smoke ventilation system shall have:                           
a. A maximum mass flow not exceeding 175 kg/s                                                                   
b. A minimum smoke layer temperature of 180C above ambient. 

2.  MAKE-UP AIR 

(REPLACEMENT 
AIR) 

3.  MAXIMUM 
MASS FLOW 
AND SMOKE 
TEMPERATURE 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 829 of 1348 

Table 10.8.: Mall Smoke Management System 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

4. CAPACITY OF FANS 

i. 

The capacity of an engineered smoke control system shall be capable of 
handling the largest demand for smoke exhaust from the worst case sce-
nario.  

ii.  Another  example of the worst case scenario in an atrium. See Figure 10.13 

for example, the smoke is originating from the second level and with pro-
truded obstructions from upper levels.  

iii.  Adequate arrangement (s) shall be made in each smoke reservoir for the 
removal of smoke in a way that will prevent the formation of stagnant re-
gions.  

5.  SMOKE             

i. 

CURTAINS 

Listed and approved smoke curtains shall be provided at every 122 m of 
the mall corridor and circulation areas. 

ii.  All smoke curtains unless permanently fixed in position, shall be brought 
into the position automatically to provide adequate smoke-tightness and 
effective depth.  

iii.  The effective depth in general is 20% of the total floor ceiling height of the 

space. 

iv.  A minimum headroom of 1800 mm shall be maintained on circulation 

v. 

paths when smoke screens or curtains are activated. 
Smoke screens shall be located strategically to channel the smoke towards 
the extract fans.  

vi.  Where glass walls or panels are being used as smoke screens to form a 

smoke reservoir or as channeling screens, they shall be 1 hour fire rated or 
shall be protected with closely spaced draft sprinklers. See Figure 10.19  
for illustrations. 

6.  COMMUNICATING 

i. 
SPACES AND                    
CONVENIENCE 
OPENINGS 

Convenience Openings and communicating spaces shall not require a 
smoke management system. However, any of the following methods shall 
be implemented to prevent smoke spread to the communicating space or 
convenience opening from the mall.                                                                                       
a. Maintaining the smoke layer interface at a level higher than that of the 
highest opening to the communicating space.                                                          
b. Providing a smoke barrier to limit the smoke spread into the communi-
cating space.                                                                                                                           
c. Providing an opposed airflow through the opening to prohibit smoke 
spread into the communicating space.                                                                             
d. Providing smoke screens as per Table 10.5.5. 

7. CLEAR LAYER 

i. 

The design smoke layer base shall be above the heads of people escaping 
beneath it. The minimum height shall be 1830 mm.  

 
 

 

 

DUBAI MALL FOR ILLUSTRATION 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 830 of 1348 

 

Table 10.8.: Mall Smoke Management System 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

8.  SYSTEM                        

i.  Mall Smoke Control Systems shall be independently activated by each of 

ACTIVATION 

ii. 

the following:                                                                                                                                 
a. Required automatic sprinkler system and smoke detectors (which ever 
activates first)                                                                                                                                 
b. Manual controls that are readily accessible to the fire department. 
For large spaces where smoke stratification can occur, one of the follow-
ing detection means shall be used:                                                                                              
a. Beam-type smoke detector(s) aimed at an upward angle to intersect 
the smoke layer regardless of the level of stratification.                                                               
b. Horizontally mounted beam-type smoke detector(s) located at the 
ceiling with additional beam-type smoke detector(s) located at other 
appropriate levels in the volume to cover any identified unconditioned 
(dead air) spaces.                                                                                                                                
c. Horizontally mounted beam-type smoke detector(s) located below the 
lowest expected level of stratification.                                                                                       
d. Aspiration (air sampling) smoke detection system. 

iii.  A means of manually starting and stopping the smoke management sys-
tem shall be provided with Smoke Control Panel (SCP) at the emergency 
command center. 

9. USAGE OF HVAC  

i. 

SYSTEM 

The mall HVAC system shall be permitted for corridor or open circulation 
areas smoke extraction provided that the system adheres to the provi-
sions of Section 2.8. and such system does not interfere with the natural 
smoke movement of the area.  

ii.  HVAC system used for any smoke control and make-up air supply shall be 

designed and installed with dampers in ducting network such that the 
activation of system shall not circulate the smoke back into the air supply 
network and into the building. 

iii.  The presence of filters or sound attenuators shall be allowed on the sup-

ply ductwork.  

iv.  The mall HVAC system shall also be permitted to achieve and enhance 
the mall smoke control system by establishing positive pressure differ-
ences at the adjacent zones, communicating spaces and compartments. 
v.  Any HVAC system put to service for establishing pressure differences or 
as smoke purge system shall be designed through an engineering analy-
sis.  

10. STAND-BY FAN 

i.  Back-up (Stand-by) fans shall not be required for mall smoke manage-

ment systems. 

11. STAND-BY POWER 

i.  Mall smoke management system, the control panel, automatic Smoke 

curtains, Fan shall be provided with an emergency power. 

ii.  The fan of the smoke control system shall be supplied by both normal 

and standby power.  

iii.  The fan power wiring and ducts shall be located and properly protected 
to ensure a minimum of 20 minutes of operation in the event of activa-
tion. 

 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 831 of 1348 

2.11.  Smoke Venting System Using Natural Vents on Roof 

2.11.1.  Smoke venting systems using natural vents to the outside shall comply with the rele-

vant general requirements for smoke control systems as per Section 2.5 and Table 
10.9. 

Table 10.9.: Smoke Venting Using Natural Vents on Roof 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  NATURAL 

SMOKE 
VENTS 

i. 

ii. 

Smoke vents shall be listed and approved by Civil Defence as per the test require-
ments of Section 6. 
The smoke vents shall be dedicated smoke vents, with fail safe option such as the 
thermal valve, the fusible links and the electrically driven actuation devices.  

iii.  Vents shall be automatically resettable after operation.  
iv.  Hurricane type smoke vents or vents without electrical power and inability to 

interface with Fire and Sprinkler systems shall not be acceptable for smoke 
venting purpose. 

2.  MAKE-UP 
AIR 
(REPLACEMENT 
AIR) 

Sufficient makeup air shall be available for the natural vents. 

i. 
ii.  Makeup air shall be provided by either fans, openings to the outside leakage 

paths, or the combination thereof. 

iii.  Where mechanical make-up air is supplied, the supply points for the makeup air 

shall be located beneath the smoke layer interface. 

3.  LOCATION 

i. 

AND     
SPACING 

ii. 

Smoke vents shall be located on the roof, where smoke plume and reservoir is 
available vertically above the fire loads. 
The smoke vent opening shall be sized based on the floor area as per                
Table 10.9.a. 

iii.  The smoke vent distribution shall be based on the volume of the space in accord-

iv. 

ance with Table 10.9.a. 
In no case the distance between two vents shall exceed 4H, where H is the total 
floor to ceiling height of the volume. 

v.  Alternatively, in an irregular vent plan, the distance between any point on the 

floor and the nearest vent should not exceed 2.8H, where H is the total floor to 
ceiling height of the volume. 

4. SMOKE 

i. 

SCREENS 

Listed and approved smoke curtains should be provided to enhance the perfor-
mance of the natural smoke vents, where floor area exceeds 4000 m2 . 

ii.  All smoke curtains unless permanently fixed in position, shall be brought into po-

sition automatically to provide adequate smoke-tightness and effective depth.  

iii.  The effective depth in general is 20% of the total floor ceiling height of the space. 
iv.  Minimum headroom of 1800 mm shall be maintained on circulation and evacua-

v. 

tion paths when smoke screens or curtains are activated. 
Smoke screens shall be located strategically to channel and create smoke reser-
voir below the smoke vents.  

vi.  Downstands, complying with 20% of the hazard height shall be permitted in lieu 

of smoke screens. 

5. ACTIVATION 

i. 

ii. 

The smoke vents shall be monitored by a control panel, interfaced with Fire de-
tection and sprinkler activation. 
Smoke vents shall also be equipped with actuation devices such as thermal valve, 
fusible links or other such devices for fail safe actuation. 

iii.  Smoke vents shall be operable manually with manual overriding switch. 
iv.  For natural smoke control system, the natural ventilators shall be                                   
a. In the “open” position in the event of power/system failure.                                       
b. Positioned such that they will not be adversely affected by positive wind pres-
sure. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 832 of 1348 

 

Table 10.9.: Smoke Venting Using Natural Vents 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

6. CONTROL 

i. 

The smoke vent system shall have a dedicated control unit, interfaced with a 
fire detection and alarm system and sprinkler activation. 

ii.  A smoke vent layout clearly depicting the layout of smoke vents, their identi-

fication zones and respective manual switches shall be provided near the 
entrance or an approved location beside the control unit. 

Table 10.9.a.: Smoke Vent Opening Area and Distribution Requirements 

MINIMUM OPENING AREA OF VENTS 
BASED ON PERCENTAGE OF THE AREA 

MAXIMUM DISTANCE OF VENT FROM 
ANY PART OF THE VOLUME 

1.  If 1 % of the floor area 

2.  If 1.25 % of the floor area 

3.  If 1.5 % of the floor area 

18 m 

21 m 

24 m 

Schematic 10.26.: Typical Natural Smoke Vent System arrangement 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 833 of 1348 

2.12.  Smoke Venting System Using Mechanical Exhaust Fans 

2.12.1.  Smoke venting systems using mechanical exhaust fans shall comply with the relevant 
general requirements for smoke control systems as per Section 2.5 and Table 10.10. 

 

Table 10.10.: Smoke Venting Using Mechanical Exhaust Fans 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  MECHANICAL 

i.  Mechanical smoke exhaust fans shall be listed and approved by Civil Defence 

SMOKE                 
EXHAUST FANS 

ii. 

as per the test requirements of Section 6. 
The mechanical smoke exhaust fans shall be dedicated smoke exhaust fans 
and electrically operated.   

iii.  Hurricane type and Natural type smoke exhaust fans without electrical pow-

er shall not be acceptable for smoke exhaust purpose. 

iv.  Smoke exhaust fans shall comply with Table 10.1. and shall be approved for 

effective operation at 4000C for 2 hours. 

2. DESIGN CRITERIA  i. 

ii. 

The mechanical smoke exhaust fans shall be designed to achieve 6 air chang-
es per hour in a single smoke zone of not more than 900 m2, assuming a sin-
gle smoke zone is active at any single point in time.  
Smoke zone areas can vary if justified by an engineering analysis. 

3.  MAKE-UP AIR 

(REPLACEMENT 
AIR) 

i.  Make-up air shall not exceed an inlet velocity of 5 m/s. 
ii. 
iii.  Makeup air shall be provided by either fans, openings to the outside leakage 

Sufficient makeup air shall be available for the mechanical exhaust fans. 

paths, or the combination thereof. 

iv.  Where mechanical make-up air is supplied, the supply points for the makeup 

air shall be located beneath the smoke layer interface. 

4.  LOCATION AND 

i. 

SPACING 

Smoke exhaust fans shall be located on the roof, where smoke plume and 
reservoir is available vertically above the fire loads. 

5. SMOKE SCREENS 

i. 

ii. 

Listed and approved smoke curtains shall be provided to enhance the perfor-
mance of the mechanical smoke exhaust fans. 
Floor area exceeding 4000 m2 shall be provided with smoke curtains or 
downstands to divide the ceiling space to accommodate a smoke reservoir. 

iii.  All smoke curtains unless permanently fixed in position, shall be brought into 

the position automatically to provide adequate smoke-tightness and effec-
tive depth.  

iv.  The effective depth in general is 20% of the total floor ceiling height of the 

space. 

v.  A minimum headroom of 1800 mm shall be maintained on circulation and 

evacuation paths when smoke screens or curtains are activated. 

vi.  Smoke screens shall be located strategically to channel and create smoke 

reservoir below the mechanical smoke exhaust fans.  

6. ACTIVATION 

i. 

The mechanical smoke exhaust fans shall be interfaced with cross zoned fire 
detection and sprinkler activation. 

ii.  A delay of activation of the roof exhaust fans, justified by the engineering 

analysis shall be permitted. 

iii.  The mechanical smoke exhaust fans shall also be operable manually with a 

manual overriding switch. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 834 of 1348 

 

Table 10.10.: Smoke Venting Using Mechanical Exhaust Fans 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

7. CONTROL 

i. 

The mechanical smoke exhaust fan system shall have a dedicated smoke con-
trol panel (SCP), interfaced with a fire detection and alarm system and a 
sprinkler activation. 

ii.  A smoke fan layout clearly depicting the layout of mechanical smoke fans, 
their identification zones and respective manual switches shall be provided 
near the entrance or an approved location beside the SCP. 

8.   STAND-BY            

i.  Mechanical exhaust fan system, Control panel and automatic Smoke cur-

POWER 

tains,  shall be provided with an emergency power. 

 

 

Schematic 10.27.: Typical Mechanical Smoke Exhaust Fan System Arrangement 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 835 of 1348 

2.13.  Mechanical Smoke Purging System Using Dedicated Ducting 

2.13.1.  The mechanical Smoke Purging System using dedicated ducting shall comply with the 
relevant general requirements for smoke control systems as per Section 2.5 and Table 
10.11 

 

Table 10.11.: Mechanical Smoke Purging Using Dedicated Ducting 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  MECHANICAL 

i.  Mechanical smoke extract fans shall be listed and approved by Civil Defence 

SMOKE                 
EXTRACT FANS 

2. EXTRACTION 

DUCTS 

ii. 

iii. 

as per the test requirements of Section 6. 
The mechanical smoke extract fans shall be dedicated smoke extract fans 
and electrically operated.  
Jet fans shall not be permitted to be part of the mechanical smoke purging 
system using dedicated ducting.  

iv.  Hurricane type and Natural type smoke extract fans without electrical power 

v. 

i. 

shall not be acceptable for smoke purging purpose. 
Smoke extract fans shall comply with Table 10.1.1. and shall be approved 
and listed for effective operation at 4000C for 2 hours. 

Ducting for the mechanical smoke extract shall be dedicated, independent of 
any other system in the building and shall comply with Table 10.1.3.2. 

3. DESIGN CRITERIA  i. 

The mechanical smoke purging system shall be designed to achieve 10 air 
changes per hour in a single smoke zone of not more than 3600 m2, assuming 
a single smoke zone is active at any single point in time.  
Smoke zone areas can vary if justified by an engineering analysis. 

ii. 
iii.  The capacity of the exhaust fan and any associated ducting should be calcu-
lated on the basis that the pressure close to the extract points or discharge 
points is equal to the external atmospheric pressure.  

4.  MAKE-UP AIR 

i.  Makeup air shall be drawn directly from the external and its intake shall not 

(REPLACEMENT 
AIR) 

be less than 5 m from any exhaust discharge openings.  

ii.  Outlets for the supply air shall be adequately distributed over the area. 
iii.  Mechanical makeup air is permitted to be provided at a minimum rate of 
85% of the extract air via openings directly to the exterior of the building.  

iv.  Make-up air shall not exceed an inlet velocity of 5 m/s. 
v. 
vi.  Makeup air shall be provided by either fans, openings to the outside leakage 

Sufficient makeup air shall be available for the natural vents. 

paths, or the combination thereof. 

vii.  Where mechanical make-up air is supplied, the supply points for the makeup 

air shall be located beneath the smoke layer interface. 

viii.  Where there is natural supply of air for areas, openings not less than 2.5 % of 
the floor area of such story, shall be considered as a satisfactory make-up air 
for the smoke purge system.  

ix.  However, such 2.5 % of the floor area openings shall be evenly distributed 

over the entire  area. 

5.  LOCATION AND 

i.  Mechanical smoke extract fans shall be located at the exterior of the build-

SPACING 

 

ii. 

ing. 
The extraction inlets shall be permitted to be located at the ceiling or on 
sidewalls, provided the distribution achieves the required 10 air changes per 
hour. 

iii.  Extracted air shall be discharged directly to the external and shall not be less 

than 5 m from any air intake openings. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 836 of 1348 

 

Table 10.11.: Mechanical Smoke Purging Using Dedicated Ducting 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

6. SMOKE SCREENS 

i. 

Listed and approved smoke curtains shall be provided to enhance the perfor-
mance of the mechanical smoke purging system, where engineering analysis 
demands the restriction of volume to achieve 10 air changes per hour. 

ii.  All smoke curtains unless permanently fixed in a position, shall be brought 
into the position automatically to provide adequate smoke-tightness and 
effective smoke reservoir depth.  

iii.  Smoke screens shall be located strategically to channel and create smoke 

reservoir towards the extraction outlets.  

7. ACTIVATION 

i. 

The mechanical smoke exhaust fans shall be interfaced with a cross zoned 
Fire detection and a sprinkler activation. 

ii.  Virtual zoning shall be established in the area with fire detection, alarm or 

sprinkler or deluge system activation which shall be configured to trigger the 
smoke extraction so as to achieve 10 air-change per hour in that particular 
virtual zone. 

iii.  The smoke extract system zoning shall be permitted to be determined by the 
engineered design  and coordinated with the sprinkler or deluge system zone 
system design.  

iv.  The mechanical smoke exhaust fans shall also be operable manually with a 

manual overriding switch. 

8. CONTROL 

i. 

The mechanical smoke exhaust fan system shall have a dedicated smoke con-
trol panel (SCP), interfaced with a fire detection and alarm system and a 
sprinkler activation. 

ii.  A smoke extract fan layout clearly depicting the layout of mechanical smoke 

fans, their identification physical and virtual zones and respective manual 
switches shall be provided near the entrance or an approved location beside 
the SCP. 

iii.  Visual indication of the operation status of the smoke extract system shall 

also be provided with the SCP, as required by Table 10.1.11. 

Schematic 10.28.: Typical Mechanical Smoke Purging Using Dedicated Ducting 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 837 of 1348 

 

Table 10.11.: Mechanical Smoke Purging Using Dedicated Ducting 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

9. STAND-BY FAN 

i.  Back-up (Stand-by) fans shall not be required for mechanical smoke purg-

ing system using a dedicated ducting. 

10. STAND-BY POWER 

i.  A mechanical smoke purging system using dedicated ducting, Control 
panel, automatic Smoke curtains and fans shall be provided with both 
normal and emergency power. 

ii.  The system power wiring and ducting shall be located and properly pro-
tected to ensure a minimum of 60 minutes of operation in the event of 
activation. See Section 6. for cable details. 

Schematic 10.29.: Schematic of Typical Mechanical Smoke Purging Using Dedicated Ducting at Basement 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 838 of 1348 

2.14.  Jet Fan Smoke Clearance System 

2.14.1.  Jet Fan Smoke clearance system shall comply with the relevant general requirements 

for smoke control systems as per Section 2.5 and Table 10.12.  

 

Table 10.12.: Jet Fan Smoke Clearance System 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  JET FANS 

i. 

Jet fans shall be listed and approved by Civil Defence as per the test require-
ments of Section 6. 
Jet fans shall be approved for effective operation at 4000C for 2 hours. 

ii. 
iii.  All jet fans shall be connected to the local jet fan control panel in groups of not 
more than 3 jet fans, by 60 minutes fire rated cabling in a zigzag configuration. 
No two consecutive jet fans in a straight line shall be wired in the same group.  

2. EXTRACTION 

i. 

DUCTS 

ii. 

Ducted extraction outlets shall be incorporated into the jet fan system design  
to enhance the performance of jet fans, where a well defined openings on the 
perimeter of the area are not available for an effective smoke clearance. 
Extracted air shall be discharged directly to the external and shall not be less 
than 5 m from any air intake openings. 

iii.  The ducts shall be approved in compliance with Table 10.1.3.2. 

3. DESIGN          

CRITERIA 

i. 

ii. 

At least 10 air-changes per hour shall be achieved with a jet fan system, during 
fire condition.  
Each smoke control zone shall have its own jet fan system. The exhaust fan 
system in each zone should be designed to run in at least two parts, such that 
the total exhaust capacity does not fall below 50 % of the required rate of ex-
tract in the event of failure of any one part and that a fault or failure of the 
exhaust jet fan system in one zone will not affect the operation of the exhaust 
jet fan system in the other zones.  

iii.  The capacity of the exhaust fan and any associated ducting should be calculat-

ed on the basis that the pressure close to the extract points or discharge 
points is equal to the external atmospheric pressure.  

iv.  The smoke discharge points should be located such that the smoke extracted 
from the smoke exhaust fans does not affect any occupied area or means of 
escape at the level where smoke is discharged.  
The jet fans system design shall be such that the bulk air velocity induced by 
the jet fans is sufficient to stop the advance of the ceiling jet within 5 m from 
the fire location in the direction opposite to the induced bulk air flow.  

v. 

vi.  The jet fans system design shall take into consideration the presence of any 

down-stand beams and other obstruction that are of depths of more than 
1/10 of the floor to ceiling height of the volume so as to account for any re-
sistance to airflow and turbulence.  

vii.  On activation of the jet fans system, the movement of smoke towards the ex-
tract/discharge point(s) should not adversely affect the means of escape and 
cause smoke to be blown into the egress areas.  

viii.  The operation of the jet fans system should be such that there are no stagnant 

areas where smoke can accumulate in the event of fire.  

ix.  The operation of the jet fans system should not cause the volume of air move-
ment to be greater than that volume extracted by the main exhaust or extract  
fans.  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 839 of 1348 

i. 

 

Table 10.12.: Jet Fan Smoke Clearance System 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

4.  MAKE-UP AIR 

i.  Makeup air shall be provided by either fans, openings to the outside leakage 

(REPLACEMENT 
AIR) 

paths, or the combination thereof. 

ii.  Where there is natural supply of air for areas, openings not less than 2.5 % of 
the floor area of such story, shall be considered as a satisfactory make-up air 
for the jet fan smoke clearance system.  

iii.  However, such 2.5 % of floor area openings shall be evenly distributed over 

the entire  area. 

iv.  Where natural make-up air in accordance with Table 10.12.4.i and ii is not 

available, mechanical makeup air shall be provided at a minimum rate of 85% 
of the extract air via openings directly to the exterior of the building.  

v.  Make-up air shall not exceed an inlet velocity of 2 m/s. 
vi.  Makeup air intake shall not be less than 5 m from any exhaust discharge open-

ings.  

vii.  Outlets for the supply air shall be adequately distributed over the area. 
viii.  Where mechanical make-up air is supplied, the supply points for the makeup 

air shall be located beneath the smoke layer interface. 

ix.  Sharing of the fresh air fan and exhaust air fans shall be permitted provided 

that the fans, wiring and control panel are protected with at least 1-hour fire 
resistance rating.  

5.  JET FAN            

i. 

ZONING 

ii. 

The space shall be divided into virtual smoke control zones with each zone not 
larger than 2000m2 (excluding plant rooms and circulation spaces) for the pur-
pose of smoke containment and faster location of fire.  
It shall be demonstrated through CFD or modeling that smoke can be con-
tained within the zone boundaries and channeled by jet fans to the extract 
fans.  

iii.  Each smoke control zone shall have its own jet fans system (fresh air fans, ex-

haust air fans and jet fans) to purge smoke from the affected zone.  

iv.  Each group of exhaust or extract fans for each smoke control zone shall be 

v. 

interlocked with its corresponding groups of jet fans for that zone.  
If the group of exhaust or extract fans stops/fails in any smoke control zone, 
its corresponding jet fans in that zone shall stop. But if any of the exhaust or 
extract fan is still in operation in a particular smoke control zone, all the jet 
fans shall continue to operate in that zone.   

vi.  The exhaust fan shall continue to run even if any corresponding group of jet 

fans fails.  

vii.  The other groups of jet fans shall continue to run even if any one group of jet 

fans fails.  

i.  Where jet fan systems objective is to ventilate the space (to limit the concen-
trations of contaminants or CO levels to acceptable levels) a longitudinal Jet 
Fan ventilation system achieves its objectives through the longitudinal flow of 
air within the parking, roadway or tunnel.  

ii.  A longitudinal Jet Fan ventilation system introduces air into, or removes air 

iii. 

from, the parking or tunnel roadway at a limited number of points, such as a 
portal or a shaft, thus creating a longitudinal flow of air within the roadway, 
with discharge at the exiting portal.  
Jet fan-based longitudinal ventilation employs a series of axial fans that are 
mounted at the ceiling level of the tunnel roadway. Such fans, due to the 
effects of the high-velocity discharge, induce a longitudinal airflow through 
the length of the tunnel. In all longitudinal ventilation systems, the exhaust 
gas stream (pollutants or smoke) discharges from the exit portal. 

6. LONGITUDINAL 

ZONING 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 840 of 1348 

 

 

Schematic 10.30.: Zoning of Jet Fan System 

Schematic 10.31.: Longitudinal arrangement of Jet Fan System 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 841 of 1348 

 

Table 10.12.: Jet Fan Smoke Clearance System 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

7. DESIGN FIRE SIZE 

i.  Where Jet fans are allowed by Section 3. Application of smoke control 
systems, for parking and tunnels, the design fire size *heat-release rate 
produced by a vehicle(s)+ shall be used to design the jet fan smoke 
clearance system.  
The selection of the design fire size (heat-release rate) shall consider the 
types of vehicles that are expected to use parking or the tunnel. 

ii. 

8.  FAN DISTRIBUTION 

i. 

9. SYSTEM ACTIVATION 

ii. 

i. 
ii. 

The jet fans shall be distributed at a spacing of 2/3 of the tested effec-
tive range of the particular jet fan. The tested effective range of the jet 
fan shall be taken as the distance up to the point at 0.2 m/s of the air-
velocity distribution profile.  
The minimum headroom available from jet fans shall not be less than    
2.4 m.  

Jet fan system shall be monitored by the smoke control panel (SCP). 
The jet fans system shall be activated by the Fire Detection or Deluge or 
sprinkler system serving the Jet Fan Zone.  

iii.  The activation of the jet fans system shall at least be confined to the 

smoke control zone on fire and all its adjacent zones.  

iv.  A fireman cut off and activation (override) switch shall be available on 

v. 

SCP, located at the Fire Command Centre or an approved location.  
If the fire alarm signal is isolated, the exhaust or extract fans and jet 
fans shall continue to run at high speed. If the Civil Defence personnel 
stops the fans and restart them, both the extract fans and jet fans shall 
continue to run at high speed. This arrangement shall continue until the 
fans are reset to low speed at the smoke control panel (SCP).  

10. STANDBY POWER 

i.  The jet fan smoke clearance system, the control panel, the automatic 

Smoke curtains and extract fans shall be provided with both normal and 
emergency power. 

ii.  The system power wiring and ducting shall be located and properly pro-
tected to ensure a minimum of 60 minutes of operation in the event of 
activation. 

11. ACCEPTANCE                        

CRITERIA 

 

i.  Not more than 1000 m2 shall be smoke-logged for at least 20 minutes, 
regardless of whether the fire is located within the smoke control zone 
or across the zone boundaries (Note: After 20 minutes duration, smoke 
is expected to remain confined within the 1000 m2 area).  

ii.  Within this smoke-logged area, there shall be at least 1 viable route for 

the fire-fighters where the following conditions are satisfied.                                  
a. Smoke temperature shall not exceed 2500C at a height of 1.7 m from 
floor level.                                                                                                                           
b.  Visibility shall not be less than 5 m at a height of 1.7 m from floor 
level.  

iii.  These conditions shall commence at a distance of 5 m from the fire lo-
cation in the direction opposite to the induced bulk air flow induced by 
the jet fans.  

iv.  All other areas outside the smoke-logged area shall be kept substantial-
ly free from smoke i.e. smoke temperature not more than 60°C and visi-
bility of at least 25 m. 

v.  Note: If the hot smoke test is performed, assessment is to be made on 
the operation of the jet fans system, movement of smoke towards the 
extraction or discharge points and smoke spread.  

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 842 of 1348 

 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

Table 10.12.: Jet Fan Smoke Clearance System 

9.  CFD GUIDELINE 

1. FIRE SIZE 
 
i. 

The design fire size shall be based on at least 4 MW steady-state fire (i.e. car 
fire). For a general goods vehicle, the design fire size shall be based on at 
least 10 MW steady state fire.  

 

2.  TYPE OF FIRE 

 

The type of fire shall be flaming polyurethane.  

i. 
 
3. LOCATION OF FIRE 

 

i.  Generally, the fire should be located furthest away from the exhaust or dis-
charge points and in between zones. The relevant Professional Engineer or 
Fire Safety Engineer should decide on the fire location(s) that is (are) 
deemed most demanding.  

 
4. DOWN-STAND BEAMS AND OTHER OBSTRUCTIONS 
 
i. 

The CFD model shall take into consideration the presence of any down-
stand beams and other obstructions that are of depths of more than 1/10 of 
the floor to ceiling height of the volume so as to account for any resistance 
to airflow and turbulence.  

 
5. JET FAN VELOCITY PROFILE 
 
i. 

ii. 

The validation model of the velocity profile is to be carried out for a single 
jet fan. The data from the model shall be compared against physical test 
data. As such, the jet fan shall be tested for a velocity profile by an accredit-
ed testing laboratory for comparison with the simulated velocity profile. The 
test report is to be attached to the Fire Engineering Report.  
The equation to be used for the deviation between the CFD profile and actu-
al test profile is as follows: Deviation = *(A-B) / B+ X 100% ,                                                             
Where:   
A = distance/width/height from CFD profile ,                                                                    
B = distance/width/height from actual test profile  

                                                                                                                                    

iii.  The deviation of the distance, width and height of the actual profile from 

the simulated profile at the various air velocities should be within 10%.  

The duration of the fire simulation shall be at least 20 minutes.  

 
6. DURATION OF FIRE SIMULATION 
 
i. 
 
7. SPRINKLER ACTIVATION 
 
i. 

The model shall assume there is no sprinkler activation for the design fire 
size specified in Table 10.12.9.1. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 843 of 1348 

 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

Table 10.12.: Jet Fan Smoke Clearance System 

9.  CFD GUIDELINE 

8. GRID RESOLUTION 
 
i. 

The grid size to be used in the fire model shall not be larger than 0.2m X 
0.2m X 0.2m in the smoke control zone where the fire is located and its adja-
cent zones. Other than these zones, the grid size shall not be larger than 
0.4m X 0.4m X 0.4m. Alternatively, the relevant PE or FSE undertakes a grid 
resolution study to ascertain the appropriate grid size needed for the fire 
size and smoke flows modeled (e.g. outcome of study showing that addition-
al resolution does not make much of a difference to the results).  

 

9.  SENSITIVITY STUDY 

 

i. 

A sensitivity study is to be carried out to show the impact of 1 group of jet 
fan failure nearest the fire on the overall effectiveness of the jet fans sys-
tem. This study is applicable to both fire modeling and hot smoke test. Not-
withstanding the failure of 1 group of jet fans, the acceptance criteria must 
still be maintained.  

 
10. OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE MANUAL FOR JET FAN SYSTEM 

 

i. 
ii. 

An operations and maintenance manual shall be attached.  
The manual shall contain the roles and responsibilities of the building own-
er/operator, the restrictions placed on the building or tunnel, identification 
of the sub-systems, servicing and maintenance plan, fault identification, etc. 
iii.  The manual can also be used as a guide for future renovations and changes 

to the building or tunnel.   

 
11. COMMISSIONING TEST  
 
i. 

The Inspector who carries out the commissioning test of the jet fans system 
may make reference to Table 2 of BS 7346 - Part 7 as a guide.  

ii.  When hot smoke test is performed, the Fire Safety Engineer shall use a test 

fire size of 1 MW.  

iii.  Reference may be made to AS 4391 on hot smoke test or any approved 

standards. (This standard is more relevant for an engineered smoke control 
system rather than jet fans system. Nevertheless, there are some aspects in 
this standard that the fire engineer may find useful, such as how the test can 
be prepared and carried out in a proper manner) 

 
 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 844 of 1348 

2.15.  Natural Ventilation System 

2.15.1.  The natural Ventilation System shall comply with the relevant general requirements 

for smoke control systems as per Section 2.5 and Table 10.13.  

 

Table 10.13.: Natural Ventilation System 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  OBJECTIVE 

i. 

Provision of natural ventilation to enclosed spaces, stairs or corridors etc. is to 
clear smoke accumulated during and post fire emergencies, or to overcome fun-
gus or dampness or for ventilation. 

2. OPENINGS 

i.  Openings intended for natural venting shall be permanent fixed openings or an 

automatically operable, fixed opening or vent or window. 
Such an opening shall provide minimum 1 m2 of open area. 

ii. 
iii.  Where natural venting is serving the stair enclosure, it shall be located on the 

roof of the stair core. 

iv.  Where natural ventilation is serving an open circulation area or corridor, the to-

v. 

tal opening area shall be 15 % of the floor area they are serving. 
Such an opening shall be located on the external wall of the area to  be ventilat-
ed. 

vi.  Openings shall be distributed evenly throughout the exterior wall such that no 
point in the area is more than 30 m, horizontally from the natural venting open-
ings. 

vii.  Such openings shall be clearly marked and labeled as “Smoke clearance openable 

windows”. 

3. ACTIVATION 

i.  Natural Vents shall be triggered open automatic by electrical drivers through 

ii. 

smoke detectors located within 3 m of the zone they are serving. 
Such natural vent panels or windows shall be monitored by a control panel com-
plete with zoning, manual override and reset features. 

iii.  Natural vents shall be permitted to be achieved by openable windows with man-

ual, electrical or pneumatic levers provided the openable windows provide the 
required 15%  open area for Natural venting. 

4. INTERACTION 
WITH OTHER 
SYSTEMS 

i. 

A natural ventilation system shall not be provided in the areas or zones provided 
with engineered smoke control systems or mechanical ventilation systems. 

ii.  HVAC systems shall be permitted to supply the make-up air for natural ventilated 

area, provided the return air is arranged to be exhausted directly outside. 

Schematic 10.32.: Natural Ventilation panels for illustration 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 845 of 1348 

2.16.  Mechanical Ventilation System for Pressurization 

2.16.1.  Mechanical Ventilation System used for achieving pressure differences shall comply 
with the relevant general requirements for smoke control systems as per Section 2.5 
and Table 10.14.  

Table 10.14.: Mechanical Ventilation System for Pressurization 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  OBJECTIVE 

i. 

Provision of mechanical ventilation to pressurize the exit stair enclosures can 
be achieved using vestibules. 

2. FAN COIL UNITS  i. 

Fan-coil units shall not be installed inside the exit stairs to achieve mechanical 
ventilation. 

ii.  HVAC ducting or diffusers for supply or extract shall not be installed inside the 

exit stairs to achieve mechanical ventilation. 

3. PRESSURIZA-
TION USING 
VESTIBULE 

 

i. 

ii. 

Exit enclosures provided with mechanical ventilation to achieve pressure 
differences shall have a vestibule. 
Such a vestibule shall have a dimension of not less than 1200 mm in width and 
not less than 1830 mm in the direction of egress travel. 

iii.  The vestibule shall be provided with not less than one air change per minute 

and the exhaust shall be 150 % of the supply.  

iv.  Supply air shall enter and exhaust air shall discharge from the vestibule 

v. 

through separate tightly constructed dedicated ducts.  
The supply air shall enter the vestibule at lower level, within 150 mm of the 
floor level.  

vi.  The top of the exhaust register shall be located not more than 150 mm below 

the top of the trap and shall be entirely within the smoke trap area.   

vii.  Door leaves, when in the open position, shall not obstruct such duct arrange-

ments.  

viii.  The exit enclosures shall be provided with a dampered relief opening at the 

top and supplied mechanically with sufficient air to discharge at least 2500 ft3/
min (70.8 m3/min) through the relief opening while maintaining a positive 
pressure of not less than 0.10 in. water column (25 Pa) in the stair, relative to 
the vestibule with all door leaves closed.  

ix.  To serve as a smoke and heat trap and to provide an upward-moving air col-

umn, the vestibule ceiling is recommended to be not less than 510 mm higher 
than the door opening into the vestibule.  

Schematic 10.33..: Mechanical Ventilation for Exit Enclosure Using Vestibule 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 846 of 1348 

2.17.  Mechanical Ventilation System for Smoke Exhaust 

2.17.1.  Mechanical Ventilation System used for smoke exhaust shall comply with the relevant 
general requirements for smoke control systems as per Section 2.5 and Table 10.15.  

Table 10.15.: Mechanical Ventilation System for Smoke Exhaust 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  OBJECTIVE 

i. 

Provision of mechanical ventilation to enclosed spaces, Fire Pump room, 
Generator rooms, stairs or corridors etc. is to overcome fungus, damp-
ness or to clear the smoke accumulated during and post fire emergen-
cies. 

2. DESIGN CRITERIA 

3.  EXHAUST  

4. MAKE-UP AIR 

The ventilation system shall be of exhaust mode only. 
The system shall be designed to achieve not less than 3ACH. 

i. 
ii. 
iii.  Smoke and fire from other areas shall not compromise and infiltrate the 

mechanical ventilation system.  

i. 

The mechanical ventilation system shall be an independent system of 
exhaust mode only exclusive to the particular area. 
ii. 
Exhaust shall not be into underground, basement or car park spaces. 
iii.  Exhaust shall be directly to the exterior, through dedicated ducts or 

shafts and shall not be less than 5 m from any air intake openings. 

i.  Makeup air for the system shall be drawn directly from the external, with 
the intake point not less than 5 m from any exhaust discharge openings. 
ii.  Makeup air shall not be drawn from adjoining areas, underground, base-

ment, plant rooms or car park spaces. 

iii.  Where supply air is shared with other systems, a fire and smoke damper 
shall be provided in order to mitigate fire and smoke spread into the ar-
ea. However, shared systems intended purpose of cooling, regular venti-
lation, CO limiting etc. shall not be compromised. 

5. DUCTING 

i.  Where the exhaust ducts run outside the area they are serving, they shall 

either be enclosed in a structure or be constructed to give at least the 
same fire rating as the area they are serving or that of the room through 
which they traverse, whichever is higher. The rating shall apply to fire 
exposure from both internal and external of the duct or structure. 

ii.  Ducts serving systems and areas other than the mechanical ventilated 

areas shall not pass through such rooms. 

iii.  Where the duct risers are required to be enclosed in a protected shaft 
constructed of masonry or drywall, they shall be compartmented from 
the rest of the shaft space containing other ducts or services installations. 

i. 

ii. 

This mechanical ventilation system shall be automatically activated by a 
sprinkler flow switch from the particular area and/or the building fire 
alarm system, from detectors of the particular area.  
In addition, a remote manual start-stop switch shall be made available to 
Civil Defence on the Smoke Control Panel (SCP) at the emergency com-
mand center, or near the main FACP. 

iii.  A Visual indication of the operation status of the mechanical ventilation 

system shall be provided. 

6. ACTIVATION 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 847 of 1348 

Table 10.15.: Mechanical Ventilation System for Smoke Exhaust 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

7. STANDBY POWER 

8. HVAC SYSTEM 

i. 

i. 

Standby power is required for the mechanical ventilation systems serving 
as smoke exhaust. 

Dedicated AHU system with dedicated ducting specifically for the area 
shall be permitted to serve as ventilation system, provided the system 
complies with all the features of Table 10.15. 

 

Schematic 10.34.: Ducts serving other Areas than Mechanically Ventilated Areas 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 848 of 1348 

2.18.  Ventilation System for Cooking Operations 

2.18.1.  Smoke Ventilation Systems for cooking operations shall comply with the relevant gen-

eral requirements for smoke control systems as per Section 2.5 and Table 10.16.  

Table 10.16.: Ventilation System for Cooking Operations 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  OBJECTIVE 

i. 

The cooking equipment used in processes and commercial kitchens produces 
smoke and grease laden vapors. Accumulation of these vapors in the exhaust 
equipment and ducting can be fuel for fires and needs to be adequately ventilat-
ed. 

2. FANS 

3.  DUCTS  

Smoke Exhaust fans shall be capable of operating effectively at 400°C for 2 hours. 
The air velocity through any duct shall be not less than 152.4 m/min. 

i. 
ii. 
iii.  Exhaust air volumes for hoods shall be of a sufficient level to provide for capture 

and removal of grease-laden cooking vapors. 

i. 

ii. 

Kitchen exhaust ducts shall be dedicated and shall not be shared or interact with 
any other smoke control, ventilation or HVAC systems. 
Exhaust ducts shall not pass through fire walls. All exhaust ducts shall lead direct-
ly to the exterior of the building, so as not to unduly increase any fire hazard.  

iii.  Exhaust ducts shall be constructed of and supported by carbon steel not less than 

1.37 mm (No. 16 MSG) in thickness or stainless steel not less than 1.09 mm (No. 
18 MSG) in thickness.  

iv.  Kitchen extract ducts shall be fire rated and approved in compliance with              

v. 

Table 10.1.3.2. 
In kitchens where vertical fire barriers are penetrated, the ducts shall be en-
closed in a continuous enclosure extending from the first penetrated fire barrier 
and any subsequent fire barriers or concealed spaces to or through the exterior, 
to maintain the fire resistance rating of the highest fire barrier penetrated.  
vi.  The above mentioned continuous enclosure provisions shall not be required 

where a field-applied or factory built grease duct enclosure is protected with a 
listed duct-through-penetration protection system equivalent to the fire re-
sistance rating of the assembly being penetrated and where the materials are 
installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. 

vii.  Wiring systems of any type shall not be installed in ducts, unless listed with the 

system. 

Schematic 10.35.: Separated Vertical Shaft for Kitchen Exhaust Ducts 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 849 of 1348 

Table 10.16.: Ventilation System for Cooking Operations 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

4. COMBUSTIBLES 

i. 

IN KITCHEN 

A minimum of 500 mm separation distance shall be maintained between any 
combustibles and the heat source and extraction ducting. 

5.  GREASE FILTERS 

i. 

Listed grease filters, listed baffles, or other listed grease removal devices for 
use with commercial cooking equipment shall be provided.  

ii.  Grease filters shall be arranged so that all exhaust air passes through the 

6. DAMPERS 

grease filters. 

iii.  Grease filters shall be easily accessible and removable for cleaning.  
iv.  Grease filters shall be installed at an angle not less than 45 degrees from the 

horizontal. 

v.  Mesh filters shall not be used, unless tested and is part of listed exhaust 

hood. 

i. 

ii. 

A fire-actuated damper shall be installed in the supply air plenum at each 
point where a supply air duct inlet or a supply air outlet penetrates the con-
tinuously welded shell of the exhaust hood assembly.  
The fire damper shall be listed for such use or be part of a listed exhaust 
hood with or without an exhaust damper.  

iii.  The damper actuation device shall have a maximum temperature rating of 

141°C. 

7. HOODS 

i. 

The hood or that portion of a primary collection means designed for col-
lecting cooking vapors and residues shall be constructed of and be supported 
by steel not less than 1.09 mm (0.043 in.) (No. 18 MSG) in thickness, stainless 
steel not less than 0.94 mm (0.037 in.) (No. 20 MSG) in thickness, or other 
approved material of equivalent strength and fire and corrosion resistance. 

ii.  All seams, joints, and penetrations of the hood enclosure that direct and cap-
ture grease-laden vapors and exhaust gases shall have a liquid-tight continu-
ous external weld to the hood’s lower outermost perimeter.  
Internal hood joints, seams, filter support frames, and appurtenances 
attached inside the hood shall be sealed or otherwise made grease-tight.  

iii. 

iv.  Listed exhaust hoods with or without exhaust dampers shall be permitted to 

be constructed of materials required by the listing.  

 

Schematic 10.36.: Hood and heat source separation distance from combustible materials 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 850 of 1348 

2.19.  Lift Hoistway Pressurization System 

2.19.1.  Lift Hoistway pressurization systems shall comply with Table 10.17., relevant specifi-
cations of Section 2.6., Stair Pressurization and the general requirements for smoke 
control systems as per Section 2.5. 

Table 10.17.: Lift Hoistway Pressurization Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  GENERAL 

i. 

ii. 

Lift hoistway pressurization systems shall be designed to operate within a pres-
sure difference range. This range is between the minimum design pressure differ-
ence and the maximum design pressure difference. 
The minimum pressure difference is intended to prevent smoke from entering 
the lifts. The minimum pressure difference shall be 12.5 Pa. 

iii.  The maximum pressure difference across lift doors is based on concern about lift 

doors jamming shut in the closed position. The maximum pressure difference 
shall not exceed 75 Pa. However, this value shall be reviewed and agreed by the 
lift supplier in every project, where lift hoistway pressurization is provided. 
If elevators are to be used for evacuation, the lift hoistway pressurization should 
be accompanied with “Smoke Tight Lift Lobbies”. 

iv. 

v.  Conveyors, elevators, dumbwaiters, and pneumatic conveyors serving various 

stories of a building shall not open to an exit enclosure. 

2.  SINGLE AND 

i. 

Single injection for lift hoistway pressurization shall be limited to a maximum of 
30 floors. 
Lift hoistway serving more than 30 floors in height  (Super highrise buildings) 
shall be provided with a multiple-injection system. 

MULTIPLE                  
INJECTIONS 

ii. 

iii.  For lift hoistways pressurization systems in super highrise buildings special design 

provision shall be made taking into consideration the stack effect and the piston 
effect influence on the pressure profile within the hoistway.  This shall be deter-
mined either by analytical calculations, network modeling or CFD simulations. 

3.  STAND BY 

FAN 

4. STAND BY 

POWER 

i. 

i. 

Back-up (Stand-by) fans shall not be required for Lift hoistway pressurization sys-
tems. 

The lift hoistway pressurization system fan shall be provided with an emergency 
power. 

 
 
 
 

Schematic 10.37.a.: Lift Hoistway Pressurization System 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 851 of 1348 
 
 
 

 

 

Schematic 10.37.b.: Lift Hoistway Pressurization System Schematic 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 852 of 1348 

2.20. Ventilation for Rooms with Hazardous and Flammable         

Materials 

2.20.1.  Rooms containing hazardous and flammable materials shall be provided with ventila-

tion system as per Table 10.18. and the relevant general requirements for smoke 
control systems as per Section 2.5. 

Table 10.18.: Ventilation for Rooms with Hazardous and Flammable Material  

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. OBJECTIVE 

i. 

ii. 

i. 
2.  DESIGN            

CRITERIA 

ii. 

The ventilation system for rooms storing flammable and hazardous material shall be 
to maintain the flammable concentration in the room to acceptable levels 
The same system shall also serve as smoke exhaust system during fire emergencies. 

The ventilation system for rooms storing flammable and hazardous material shall be 
dedicated and shall maintain flammable concentration level below 25% of the low 
flammable limit (LFL) or the low explosive limit (LEL). 
The ventilation system shall consist of an exhaust and supply part with a rate of 20 
air-changes per hour. 

3.  MAKE-UP 

i. 

AIR 

The exhaust plenum shall be provided within 300 mm from the floor. Fresh air shall 
be provided in apposite side within 300 mm from the floor.   

ii.  Make-up air shall be 85 % of the required exhaust of 20 air changes per hour. 
iii.  The ventilation system shall be provided for the complete floor area including pits.  

4. EXHAUST 

i. 

DUCTS 

ii. 

The extract plenum shall terminate minimum 15 m from the ignition source, prop-
erty limit or nearby building.  
The exhaust shall be direct to the external and shall not be less than 5 m from any 
air intake openings. 

iii.  Where such ducts run outside the room they shall either be enclosed in a structure 
or be constructed to give at least the same fire rating as the room which they serve 
or that of the room through which they traverse, whichever is higher. The rating 
shall apply to fire exposure from both internal and external of the duct or structure. 

iv.  Where the duct risers are required to be enclosed in a protected shaft constructed 
of masonry or drywall complying, they shall be compartmented from the rest of the 
shaft space containing other ducts or services installations 
Exhaust ducts shall not pass through fire walls.  

v. 
vi.  Exhaust ducts passing through fire barriers shall be constructed of materials and 

supports having a minimum fire-resistance rating equal to the fire barrier.  

5. DAMPERS  1.  DAMPERS PERMITTED 

 
i. 

Fire dampers shall be permitted to be installed in exhaust systems in the following 
situations:                                                                                                                                          
a. Where ducts pass through fire barriers                                                                                               
b. Where a vapor collection system installed on the end of the system is protected 
with an automatic extinguishing system.                                                                               
c. Where the duct system is protected with an automatic extinguishing system.            
d. Where ducts have been listed with interrupters.   

 
2.    DAMPERS PROHIBITED 
 
i. 

Fire dampers shall not be installed if the material being exhausted is toxic and if a 
risk evaluation indicates that the toxic hazard is greater than the fire hazard. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 853 of 1348 

Table 10.18.: Ventilation for Rooms with Hazardous and Flammable Material  

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

6. CONTROLS 

i. 

The fire Detection and Alarm system shall not be interlocked with ventilation sys-
tem to shutdown air-moving devices.  

ii.  Where the shutdown is necessary for the effective operation of an automatic 

extinguishing system, the fire detection and alarm system shall be permitted to 
be inter-locked to shutdown air moving devices.  

iii.  The mechanical ventilation shall be provided with an annunciation system to 

monitor and annunciate the failure of ventilation system.  

iv.  A suitable gas or vapour detector shall be installed at strategic locations. They 

shall be set at                                                                                                                                                  
a. 25% of LFL/LEL to annunciate and switch of all automatic operations within the 
area (if any).                                                                                                                                           
b. 50% of LFL/LEL to start the ventilation system.  

4.  STAND BY 

i. 

Back-up (Stand-by) fans shall not be required for ventilation systems. 

FAN 

4. STAND BY 

i. 

The ventilation system fan shall be provided with an emergency power. 

POWER 

 

Schematic 10.38.: Ventilation for Flammable storage rooms 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 854 of 1348 

3. Application of Smoke Control and Smoke Management 

Systems 

 

 

3.1.  Super Highrise Buildings 

 

3.1.1. 

Super Highrise buildings, having a building height more than 90 m from the fire 
access level shall be provided with smoke control systems in accordance with    
Table 10.19. 

Table 10.19.: Super Highrise Building Smoke Control System Requirements 

LOCATION 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

1.  EXIT STAIRS 

i.  The stair Pressurization shall be provided in accordance with Section 2.6. 
ii.  A multiple injection arrangement shall be provided. 
iii.  Such stair pressurization shall extend to stairs connecting all levels of the building, 

including basements. 

iv.  The stack effect in super highrise buildings can cause adverse effects, affecting 
door opening forces to exceed the acceptable limits. See Table 10.4.3. To over-
come this the designer shall consider the following options to be integrated into 
the system design, where the building height exceeds 90 m.                                                                                                       
a. The stair landing shall be interrupted with a separation and 2-way swing smoke 
door to interrupt the stair shaft at every 90 m intervals.                                                                           
b. The stair shafts shall be interrupted with transfer passageways or refuge areas 
to restrict the volume of the stair core, at every 90 m intervals.                                                               
c. The stair shafts shall be separated at regular intervals, not exceeding 90 m.                         
d. The mechanical pressurizing ducting shall be sealed and fire stopped at every 
90 m intervals.                                                                                                                                     
e. A compensated forced airflow pressurization system, counteracting the stack 
effect with an even pressure profile within the stair, shall be provided. 

2.  PASSENGER 

ELEVATOR              
LOBBY 

highrise buildings. 

i.  Elevators shall have an elevator lobby, arranged with smoke barrier. 
ii.  Elevators open to exit corridors, without lobby shall not be permitted in super 

iii.  Barriers forming the elevator lobby shall have a minimum 1-hour fire resistance 

rating. 

iv.  The elevator lobby door assemblies shall confirm to the transmitted temperature 
at the end point not exceeding 250°C above ambient at the end of 30 minutes of 
the fire exposure.  

v.  The elevator lobby door leaves shall be self-closing or automatic-closing. 
vi.  The elevator lobby door leaves shall close in response to a signal from a smoke 
detector located directly outside the elevator lobby adjacent to or on each door 
opening.  

vii.  The elevator lobby door leaves shall be permitted to close in response to a signal 

from the building fire alarm system.  

viii. No smoke control shall be required for a lobby complying with Table 10.19.2. 

3.  ENCLOSED 
EXIT AND  
EXIT ACCESS 
CORRIDORS 

i.  Corridor and open circulation areas shall be provided with a smoke management 

system in accordance with Section 2.8. 

ii.  The smoke exhaust shall not be at intermediate levels of the building. The smoke 

exhaust shall only be from roof, open to sky. Make up air is permitted to be drawn 
from intermediate levels. 

 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 855 of 1348 

Table 10.19.: Super Highrise Building Smoke Control System Requirements 

LOCATION 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

4. FIREMAN’S 
LIFT LOBBY 
(FIREFIGHTING 
LOBBY) 

i.  The fire man’s lift and firefighting lobby shall be mandatory for all super highrise 

buildings. 

ii.  Such fire man’s lift and firefighting lobby shall extend to the stairs and connect all 

levels of the building, including basements. 

iii.  Every fire man’s lift in super highrise buildings shall have a firefighting lobby, in 

accordance with Chapter 1. 

iv.  The firefighting lobby enclosure shall be constructed of smoke partitions, en-

closed in one hour fire-resistance rating and shall be arranged as smoke barrier. 
v.  Smoke control or smoke purge shall not be required for firefighting lift shafts or 

fireman’s lift lobby when the fire man’s lift is provided with the firefighting lobby. 

vi.  Firefighting stairs shall be pressurized in accordance with  Table 10.19.1. 
vii.  See Figure 10.39. 

 

 
 
 

 

Schematic 10.39.: Fireman’s Lift and Fire Lift Lobby (Firefighting Lobby)  

 

  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 856 of 1348 

3.2.  Highrise Buildings 

 

3.2.1.  Highrise buildings, having building height more than 23 m but less than 90 m from 

the fire access level shall be provided with smoke control systems in accordance 
with Table 10.20. 

Table 10.20.: Highrise Building Smoke Control System Requirements 

LOCATION 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 
Table 10.19.: Highrise Building Smoke Control System Requirements 

1.  EXIT STAIRS 

Stair Pressurization shall be provided in accordance with Section  2.6. 

i. 
ii.  Multiple injection arrangement shall be provided for buildings exceeding 30.5 

m.in height. Such stair pressurization shall extend to stairs connecting all levels 
of the building, including basements. 

2.  PASSENGER 
ELEVATOR  
LOBBY 

1.  BUILDINGS WITH PASSENGER ELEVATOR LOBBY 
 
i. 
ii.  Barriers forming the elevator lobby shall have a minimum 1-hour fire resistance 

Elevators with lobby shall be arranged with smoke barriers as follows. 

rating. 

iii.  The elevator lobby door assemblies shall confirm to the transmitted temperature 
at the end point not exceeding 250°C above ambient at the end of 30 minutes of 
the fire exposure.  

iv.  Elevator lobby door leaves shall be self-closing or automatic-closing. 
v.  The elevator lobby door leaves shall close in response to a signal from a smoke 
detector located directly outside the elevator lobby adjacent to or on each door 
opening.  

vi.  The elevator lobby door leaves shall be permitted to close in response to a signal 

from the building fire alarm system.  

vii.  No smoke control shall be required for lobby complying to Table 10.20.2. 
 
2.    BUILDINGS WITHOUT PASSENGER ELEVATOR LOBBY 
 
i. 

A lift hoistway pressurization shall be provided in accordance with                      
Section  2.19. 

i. 
ii. 

Every highrise building shall have A fireman’s lift. 
Such fireman’s lift shall extend to stairs connecting all levels of the building, in-
cluding basements. 

 
1.  BUILDINGS WITH FIREFIGHTING LIFT LOBBY 
 
i.  Where provided with a fire firefighting lift lobby, such lobby shall be in accord-

ii. 

ance with Chapter 1.  
The firefighting lobby enclosure shall be constructed of smoke partitions, en-
closed in one hour fire-resistance rating and shall be arranged as smoke barriers. 
iii.  Smoke control or smoke purge shall not be required for the firefighting lift shafts 

when the fire man’s lift is provided with a firefighting lobby. 

iv.  Firefighting stairs shall be pressurized in accordance with  Table 10.19.1. 
 
2.    BUILDINGS WITHOUT FIREFIGHTING LIFT LOBBY 
 
i. 

A lift hoistway pressurization shall be provided for the fireman’s lift in accord-
ance with Section 2.19. 

3. FIREMAN’S 
LIFT LOBBY 
(FIREFIGHTIN
G LOBBY) 

4.  ENCLOSED  

i. 

EXIT AND 
EXIT   ACCESS                  
CORRIDORS 

 

Corridor and open circulation areas shall be provided with a smoke management 
system in accordance with Section 2.8. 

ii.  The smoke exhaust shall not be at intermediate levels of the building. The smoke 

exhaust shall only be from roof, open to sky. Make up air is permitted to be 
drawn from intermediate levels. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 857 of 1348 

 

3.3.  Midrise and Lowrise Buildings 

 

3.3.1.  Midrise and Lowrise buildings, having a building height less than 23 m from the fire 

access level shall be provided with smoke control systems in accordance with                   
Table 10.21. 

Table 10.21.: Midrise and Lowrise Building Smoke Control System Requirements 

LOCATION 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

1.  EXIT STAIRS 

i. 

The stair Pressurization shall not be required for occupancies other than Hos-
pitals, Malls, Educational and Assembly. 

ii.  Where stair pressurization is provided, it shall be provided in accordance with 

Section  2.6. 

2.  PASSENGER 
ELEVATOR  
LOBBY 

Elevators with lobbies shall be arranged as smoke barriers. 

1.  BUILDINGS WITH PASSENGER ELEVATOR LOBBY 
 
i. 
ii.  Barriers forming the elevator lobby shall not be have fire-resistance rating. 
iii.  Elevator lobby door leaves shall be self-closing or automatic-closing. 
iv.  The elevator lobby door leaves shall close in response to a signal from a smoke 

detector located directly outside the elevator lobby adjacent to or on each 
door opening.  

v.  Elevator lobby door leaves shall be permitted to close in response to a signal 

from the building fire alarm system.  

vi.  No smoke control shall be required for lobbies. 
 
1.  BUILDINGS WITHOUT PASSENGER ELEVATOR LOBBY 
 
i. 

Lift hoistway pressurization shall not be required. 

3. FIREMAN’S LIFT 

LOBBY 
(FIREFIGHTING 
LOBBY) 

1.  BUILDINGS WITH FIREFIGHTING LIFT. 
 
i. 
ii.  Where provided with fire fighting lift, firefighting lift lobby shall not be re-

The firefighting lift shall not be mandatory in midrise and lowrise buildings. 

quired. 

iii.  Where provided with fire firefighting lift and firefighting lift lobby, it shall be in 

accordance with Chapter 1.  

iv.  The firefighting lobby enclosure shall be constructed of smoke partitions, en-
closed in one hour fire-resistance rating and shall be arranged as smoke barri-
ers. 

v.  A smoke control or smoke purge shall not be required for firefighting lift shafts 

when the fire man’s lift is provided with a firefighting lobby. 
vi.  The firefighting stairs pressurization shall not be mandatory. 
vii.  The firefighting stair pressurization using a vestibule, in accordance with           

Section 2.16. shall be permitted. 

 
1.  BUILDINGS WITHOUT FIREFIGHTING LIFT. 
 
i. 

Lift hoistway pressurization shall not be required. 

A smoke management for Corridor and open circulation areas shall not be re-
quired. 

ii.  Provision of natural ventilation for smoke clearance in accordance with                 

Section 2.15. shall be permitted. 

4.  ENCLOSED  

i. 
EXIT AND EXIT      
ACCESS                  
CORRIDORS 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 858 of 1348 

3.4.  Underground and Basement areas other than Parking usage 

 

3.4.1.  Underground and basement areas shall be provided with smoke control systems in 

accordance with Table 10.22. 

Table 10.22.: Underground and Basement Smoke Control System Requirements 

LOCATION 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

1.  EXIT STAIRS 

i. 

ii. 

Stairs connecting underground buildings and basements having a depth of more 
than 7 m from the fire access level shall be provided with a stair pressurization 
system, in accordance with Section 2.6. 
Such stair pressurization shall extend to all the levels of the building, if the base-
ment stair is common to all the floors above grade. 

iii.  A stair pressurization using a vestibule, in accordance with Section 2.16. shall be 

permitted. 

 WITH PASSENGER ELEVATOR LOBBY 

2.  PASSENGER 
ELEVATOR  
LOBBY 

1. 
 
i. 

Every elevator connecting underground and basement areas shall have an eleva-
tor lobby. 
Elevators with lobbies shall be arranged as smoke barriers. 

ii. 
iii.  Barriers forming the elevator lobbies shall have a minimum of 1-hour fire re-

sistance rating. 

iv.  Elevator lobby door assemblies shall confirm to the transmitted temperature at 

an end point not exceeding 250°C above ambient at the end of 30 minutes of the 
fire exposure.  
Elevator lobby door leaves shall be self-closing or automatic-closing. 

v. 
vi.  The elevator lobby door leaves shall close in response to a signal from a smoke 
detector located directly outside the elevator lobby adjacent to or on each door 
opening.  

vii.  Elevator lobby door leaves shall be permitted to close in response to a signal from 

the building fire alarm system.  

viii.  No smoke control shall be required for lobby complying to Table 10.22.2. 
 
1.  WITHOUT PASSENGER ELEVATOR LOBBY 
 
i.  Underground, basement and basement parking areas without elevator lobby shall 

not be permitted. 

i.  Underground buildings and basements having a depth of more than 7 m from the 

fire access level shall be provided with a firefighting lift. 
Such fire man’s lift shall extend to all levels of the building. 

ii. 
iii.  The firefighting lift lobby shall not be required. However, where provided with a 

firefighting lift lobby, they shall be in accordance with Chapter 1.  

iv.  The firefighting lift lobby enclosure shall be constructed of smoke partitions, en-
closed in one hour fire-resistance rating and shall be arranged as smoke barrier. 
v.  A smoke control or smoke purge shall not be required for firefighting lift shafts 

when the fire man’s lift is provided with a firefighting lobby. 

vi.  A firefighting lift pressurization using a vestibule, in accordance with Section 2.16. 

shall be permitted. 

3. FIREMAN’S 
LIFT LOBBY
(FIRE-
FIGHTING 
LOBBY) 

4.  ENCLOSED  

i. 

Corridor and open circulation areas at underground spaces and basements, other than 
parking shall be provided with a smoke management system in accordance with Section 
EXIT AND 
2.8. 
EXIT ACCESS                  
Enclosed rooms having a floor area greater than 280 m2, shall be provided with a dedicat-
CORRIDORS 
ed and independent smoke exhaust system in accordance with  Section 2.17.  OR Me-
chanical smoke purging system using a dedicated ducting in accordance with Section 
2.13., shall be provided. 

ii. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 859 of 1348 

3.5.  Parking 

 

3.5.1. 

Parking shall be provided with smoke control systems in accordance with                   
Table 10.23. 

Table 10.23.: Parking Smoke Control System Requirements 

LOCATION  SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

1.  ENCLOSED  
PARKING 

i. 

Every parking which does not comply with the “open parking” definition as per 
Chapter 1, Table 1.9.34. and Table 10.23.2.1., every enclosed parking, enclosed 
parking structure, enclosed Robotic parking structure and parking at an enclosed 
basement shall be provided with a mechanical smoke purging system using a dedi-
cated ducting in accordance with Section 2.13. 

ii.  Make-up air or replacement air shall not be required for single basement carparks, 

having an area less than 3600 m2. The drive ways (Entry and Exit) shall be perma-
nently open and provide for the required make-up air.  

iii.  A jet fan system shall not be permitted in enclosed parking. 
iv.  Stairs at enclosed parking buildings or structures having a height of more than 23 
m from the fire access level, shall be provided with a stair pressurization system in 
accordance with Section 2.6. 

 “OPEN PARKING” DEFINITION 

1. 
 
i.  Open parking shall comply with Chapter 1, Table 1.9.34. 
ii. 

Each parking level shall have permanent wall openings open to the exterior or at-
mosphere, for an area of not less than 0.4 m2 for each linear meter of its exterior 
perimeter.  

iii.  Such openings shall be distributed over 40 percent of the building perimeter sur-

iv. 

face or uniformly over each of at least two opposing side surfaces. 
Interior wall lines, column lines and obstructions shall be at least 20 percent open, 
with openings distributed evenly to provide ventilation. 

v.  Any part of the parking shall be within 30 m of the permanent natural ventilation 

opening on the perimeter surface, required by Table 10.23.2.1.iii. 

 
2.  “OPEN PARKING” HAVING A FLOOR AREA UP TO 4000 m2 
 
i.  Open parking complying with Table 10.23.2.1., and having a total floor area of up 
to 4000 m2  shall not be required to have any smoke purging or ventilation system. 
Stairs at open parking buildings or structures having a height of more than 23 m 
from the fire access level, shall be provided with a stair pressurization system in 
accordance with Section 2.6. 

ii. 

 
3.  “OPEN PARKING” HAVING A FLOOR AREA MORE THAN 4000 m2  
 
i.  Open parking complying with Table 10.23.2.1., and having a total floor area of 

more than 4000 m2 , shall be provided with either mechanical smoke purging sys-
tem using ducting in accordance with Section 2.13. OR Jet fan system in accord-
ance with Section 2.14 OR  combination thereof as a hybrid system. 
Stairs at open parking buildings or structures having a height of more than 23 m 
from the fire access level, shall be provided with a stair pressurization system in 
accordance with Section 2.6. 

ii. 

iii.  Smoke management system zoning shall be permitted to be 4000 m2 . 
 

2.  OPEN  

PARKING 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 860 of 1348 

3.6.  Mall 

 

3.6.1.  Malls shall be provided with smoke control systems in accordance with Table 

10.24. 

 

Table 10.24.: Mall Smoke Control System Requirements 

LOCATION  SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

1.  MALL 

1.  MALL CIRCULATION AREA 
 
i.  Malls shall be provided with smoke control systems in accordance with                            

Section 2.10. 

ii.  Automatic smoke curtains or permanent downstands shall be installed strategical-
ly in open circulation areas as per the engineering analysis but not more than 122 
m of travel distance. 

 
2.    ATRIUM 
 
i. 

The atrium shall be provided with an atrium smoke control in accordance with                           
Section 2.7. 

ii.  Where exterior façade or roof is accessible and justified by an engineering analy-
sis, a natural ventilation system, in accordance with either Section 2.11. OR           
Section 2.15., shall be permitted. 

 
3.    ENCLOSED SERVICE CORRIDORS 
 
i. 

Enclosed service corridors shall be provided with a corridor Smoke management in 
accordance with Section 2.8. 

 
4.     ANCHOR STORES, HYPERMARKETS AND TENANT SPACES HAVING FLOOR AREA 

LARGER THAN 1000 m2 

 
i. 

ii. 

Tenant spaces having an area more than 1000 m2 shall be provided with an inde-
pendent and dedicated corridor smoke management in accordance with                       
Section 2.8. 
Such a smoke management system with 6 ACH, shall be restricted to a maximum 
zone areas of 2000 m2. 

iii.  Such zoning of 2000 m2 shall be permitted to be achieved by listed smoke curtains 

and/or permanent downstands, complying with 20% of the hazard height. 

iv.  Make-up air shall be permitted to be withdrawn from the mall. 
v. 

Listed and approved smoke curtains shall be provided to isolate the tenant space 
from the mall during fire scenario in the tenant space as well as the mall. 

 
5.    COMMUNICATING SPACES 
 
i. 

Communicating spaces shall not be required to have dedicated smoke control sys-
tems. However, a smoke containment approach shall be implemented in accord-
ance with Table 10.5.6. 

 
 
 

 

  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 861 of 1348 

3.7.  Tunnels 

 

3.7.1. 

Tunnels shall be provided with smoke control systems in accordance with                  
Table 10.25. 

Table 10.25.: Tunnel Smoke Management System Requirements 

LOCATION  SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

1.   ROAD  

TUNNEL 

1.  GENERAL 
 
i. 

Ventilation is necessary in most road tunnels to limit the concentrations of contami-
nants to acceptable levels within the traveled roadway.  

ii.  Ventilation systems can also be used to control smoke and heated gases that are 

generated during a tunnel fire emergency.  

iii.  The intent of the Tunnel Smoke control shall be to provide an evacuation path for 

motorists who are exiting from the tunnel and to facilitate fire-fighting operations.  

iv.  Smoke management Systems, other than using jet fan systems, shall be installed 

through a fire engineering analysis, demonstrating the efficiency and fulfillment of 
the above mentioned intent. 

 
1.1.    TUNNELS WITH BIDIRECTIONAL TRAFFIC 
 
i. 

In tunnels with bidirectional traffic, where motorists can be on both sides of the fire 
site, the following objectives shall be met.                                                                                
a. Smoke stratification shall not be disturbed.                                                                                
b. The longitudinal air velocity shall be kept at low magnitudes.                                                                          
c. Smoke extraction through ceiling openings or high openings along the tunnel wall
(s) is effective and shall be considered. 

 
1.2.    TUNNELS WITH UNIDIRECTIONAL TRAFFIC 
 
i. 

In tunnels with unidirectional traffic, where motorists are likely to be located up-
stream of the fire site, the following objectives shall be met.                                                        
a.  Prevent a backlayering by producing a longitudinal air velocity that is greater than 
the critical velocity in the direction of the traffic flow.                                                                  
b.  Avoid disruption of the smoke layer initially by not operating jet fans that are lo-
cated near the fire site. Operate fans that are farthest away from the site first.                   
c. Maximize the exhaust rate in the ventilation zone that contains the fire and mini-
mize the amount of outside air that is introduced by a transverse system.                                
d. Create a longitudinal airflow in the direction of traffic flow by operating the up-
stream ventilation zone(s) in maximum supply and the downstream ventilation zone
(s) in maximum exhaust. 

 
2.     ROAD TUNNELS HAVING TOTAL LENGTH OF LESS THAN 90 m. 
 
i.  Natural ventilation in accordance with either Section 2.11. OR Section 2.15. shall be 

acceptable.   

ii.  Natural ventilation utilizing the tunnel openings shall be acceptable.      
iii.  A jet fan system shall not be mandatory. 
 
 
3.     ROAD TUNNELS HAVING TOTAL LENGTH OF MORE THAN 90 m. 
 
i. 

A jet fan system, in accordance with Section 2.14. shall be provided for the entire 
tunnel. 

ii.  Other systems or combinations of systems shall be permitted, where justified by an 

engineering analysis and CFD modeling. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 862 of 1348 

Table 10.25.: Tunnel Smoke Management System Requirements 

LOCATION  SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

2.   RAIL  

TUNNEL 

1.     RAIL TUNNELS HAVING TOTAL LENGTH OF LESS THAN 90 m. 
 
i.  Natural ventilation in accordance with either Section 2.11. OR Section 2.15. shall be 

acceptable.   

ii.  Natural ventilation utilizing the tunnel openings shall be acceptable.      
iii.  A jet fan or mechanical ventilation system shall not be mandatory. 
 
2.     RAIL TUNNELS HAVING TOTAL LENGTH OF MORE THAN 90 m. 
 
i. 

A jet fan system, in accordance with Section 2.14. shall be provided for the entire 
tunnel. OR a mechanical smoke purging system using dedicated ducting shall be pro-
vided in accordance with Section 2.13. 

ii.  Other systems or combinations of systems shall be permitted, where justified by an 

engineering analysis and CFD modeling. 

3.  SERVICE 
TUNNEL 

1.     SERVICE OR CABLE TUNNELS OF ANY LENGTH. 
 
i. 
ii.  Natural ventilation utilizing the tunnel openings shall be acceptable, where the tun-

A mechanical ventilation system in accordance with Section 2.17., shall be provided. 

nel length is less than 90 m.      

iii.  A jet fan system, in accordance with Section 2.14. OR a mechanical smoke purging 
system using dedicated ducting, in accordance with Section 2.13. OR other systems 
or combinations of systems shall be permitted, where justified by an engineering 
analysis and CFD modeling. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 863 of 1348 

3.8.  Factories and Warehouses 

 

3.8.1. 

Factories and Warehouses shall be provided with smoke control systems in accord-
ance with Table 10.26. 

Table 10.26.: Factories and Warehouse Smoke Extract System Requirements 

LOCATION 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

1.  FACTORIES AND                   

1.     IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA IS LESS THAN 230 m2 
 

WAREHOUSES 

 
ROOF SMOKE     
EXTRACTION FAN 
SYSTEMS OR ROOF 
VENTING SYSTEMS 
OR MECHANICAL 
DUCTED EXTRAC-
TION SYSTEMS 
THAT DO NOT HAVE 
BACK-UP POWER 
FOR THEIR OPERA-
TION DURING 
EMERGENCIES 
SHALL NOT BE    
ACCEPTABLE 

i. 
ii. 

Roof Ventilation system in accordance with Section 2.11. shall be provided. 
Fresh air from the unit entrances and openings shall be sufficient for the 
make-up or replacement air. 

 
2.     IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA IS 230 m2   - 900 m2
 

i. 
ii. 

Roof Ventilation system in accordance with Section 2.11. shall be provided. 
In addition to the fresh air from the unit entrances and openings, make-up 
air fans shall be provided. OR the sufficient replacement air opening area to 
the exterior of the perimeter of the facility shall be provided. 

 
3.     IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA IS  901 m2   - 2000 m2
 

i. 

Roof Ventilation system in accordance with Section 2.11. shall be provided. 
OR  

ii.  Mechanical roof exhaust fans in accordance with Section 2.12. shall be pro-

iii. 

vided. 
In addition to the fresh air from the unit entrances and openings, make-up 
air fans shall be provided. OR the sufficient replacement air opening area to 
the exterior of the perimeter of the facility shall be provided. 

 
4.     IF TOTAL BUILT-UP GROUND FLOOR AREA IS MORE THAN 2000 m2
 

i. 

Roof Ventilation system in accordance with Section 2.11. shall be acceptable 
where justified by the engineering analysis of wind and temperature effects 
on the proposed system.                                                                                         
OR  

ii.  Mechanical roof exhaust fans in accordance with Section 2.12. shall be pro-

vided. 
In addition to the fresh air from the unit entrances and openings, make-up 
air fans shall be provided. OR the sufficient replacement air opening area to 
the exterior of the perimeter of the facility shall be provided. 

A ventilation system shall be provided in accordance with Section 2.20. 

iii. 

 
 

i. 
2.   ROOMS                     
STORING                  
HAZARDOUS 
AND                           
FLAMMABLE 
CHEMICALS 

 

 
 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 864 of 1348 

3.9.  Smoke Control System Requirements at Various Occupancies 

 

3.9.1. 

Various locations and occupancies shall have smoke control systems in accordance 
with Table 10.27. 

Table 10.27.: Smoke Control Requirements at Various Occupancies 

LOCATION 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

1.  HOSPITAL 
 

i. 

Hospitals shall have corridor and open spaces smoke management systems in 
accordance with Section 2.8. 
Every hospital floor shall have a minimum of two smoke zones. 

ii. 
iii.  Each such smoke zone shall be separated by smoke compartments and smoke 

doors. 

iv.  The activation of the corridor and open spaces smoke management system shall 

be by the sprinkler activation or cross zoned smoke detection activation in that 
particular zone. 

v.  A HVAC system shall be permitted to be in operation in zones other than the fire 

zone. 

vi.  Stairs shall be pressurized in accordance with Section 2.6. 

1.  ENCLOSED CORRIDORS 
 
i. 

Enclosed corridors and enclosed circulation spaces shall be provided with a 
smoke management system in accordance with Section 2.8.,  

ii.  A HVAC system shall be permitted to be in operation in zones other than the fire 

zone. 

iii.  Where exterior façade or roof is accessible for exit corridors and circulation spac-

es, a natural ventilation system, in accordance with Section 2.15., shall be per-
mitted. 

 
2.   STAIRS 
 
i. 

The stair pressurization is not mandatory if building is not Highrise. Where venti-
lation or pressurization for the stair is required, a pressurization using a vestibule 
in accordance with Section 2.16. shall be permitted. 

 
3.    ENCLOSED SPORTS HALL AND AUDITORIUMS WITH LEGITIMATE STAGE OR HAV-

ING AREA MORE THAN 2000 m2 

 
i. 

Dedicated smoke purging system in accordance with Section 2.13., shall be pro-
vided. 

ii.  Where exterior façade or roof is accessible and justified by an engineering analy-
sis, a natural ventilation system, in accordance with either Section 2.11. OR           
Section 2.15., shall be permitted. 

1.  OPEN PLAN OFFICE 
 
i.  Open plan office spaces shall not be required to have smoke control systems. 

However, where exterior façade is accessible, an automatic openable ventilation 
panel system in accordance with Section 2.15. shall be provided for smoke clear-
ance. 
ii. 
Such windows shall be clearly marked as “smoke clearance openable windows”. 
iii.  However, stairs of open plan offices in highrise buildings shall be pressurized in 

accordance with Section 2.6. 

iv.  Where exterior façade or roof is accessible for exit corridors and circulation spac-

es, a natural ventilation system, in accordance with Section 2.15., shall be per-
mitted. 

2.   SCHOOL 
 

3. BUSINESS 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |  September 2018Page 865 of 1348 

 

Table 10.27.: Factories and Warehouse Smoke Extract System Requirements 

LOCATION 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

4.  ENCLOSED CORRIDORS IN LOWRISE 
AND MIDRISE BUILDINGS, HAVING A 
CIRCULATION LENGTH GREATER 
THAN  60 M  

i. 

Enclosed corridors of lowrise and midrise buildings, 
having a circulation length of in excess of 60 m such as 
in covered mercantile spaces, staff accommodations, 
labour accommodations, residential buildings, office 
buildings and where exterior façade or roof is accessi-
ble, natural ventilation in accordance with Section 2.15 
shall be provided. However, fire rating of the walls shall 
be ensured. 

5.    FIRE PUMP ROOM 

6.    EMERGENCY COMMAND CENTER 

7.    DIESEL GENERATOR ROOM 

i. 

A dedicated mechanical ventilation system in accord-
ance with Section 2.17., shall be provided. 

ii.  Rooms shall be temperature controlled. Dedicated AHU 
are recommended to be provided to maintain the tem-
peratures in these rooms to as recommended by the 
equipment and control panel manufacturers. 

8.    CINEMAS 

9.    EXHIBITION CENTER 
10.  ASSEMBLY HALLS 
11.  SPORTS HALLS 
12.  AUDITORIUM 
13.  INDOOR STADIUM 
 
HAVING AREA MORE THAN 2000 m2 

14.  THEATERS  
 

15. ATRIUM 

16.  COOKING  OPERATIONS 

i. 

ii. 

i. 

ii. 

A dedicated mechanical smoke purge system in accord-
ance with Section 2.13., shall be provided. 
The smoke purge system shall be permitted to provide 
6 air changes per hour. 

A dedicated mechanical smoke purge system in accord-
ance with Section 2.13., shall be provided. 
The smoke purge system shall be permitted to provide 
6 air changes per hour. 

iii.  Where exterior façade or roof is accessible and justified 
by an engineering analysis, a natural ventilation system, 
in accordance with either Section 2.11. OR                 
Section 2.15., shall be permitted. 

i. 

i. 

A smoke management system in accordance with     
Section 2.9. shall be provided. 

The atrium shall be provided with an atrium smoke 
management system in accordance with Section 2.7. 

ii.  Where exterior façade or roof is accessible and justified 
by engineering analysis, a natural ventilation system, in 
accordance with Section 2.15., shall be permitted. 

i. 

All independent commercial kitchens shall be provided 
with ventilation systems for cooking operations in ac-
cordance with Section 2.18. 

ii.  All restaurant kitchens shall be provided with ventila-

tion systems for cooking operations in accordance with 
Section 2.18. 

iii.  All Kitchens located  in Malls, Hospitals and Highrise 

buildings shall be provided with ventilation systems for 
cooking operations in accordance with Section 2.18. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |  September  2018Page 866 of 1348 

4. Design, Installation, Inspection, Acceptance and                    

Maintenance of Smoke Control Systems 

 

 

4.1.  Design/Specification and Submittals 

 

4.1.1.  Design, Specifications and Submittals to Civil Defence for approval shall be the 

main consultant’s responsibility. The consultant shall have competent and knowl-
edgeable personnel to understand the Civil Defence requirements and codes and 
standards. 

 
4.1.2. 

It is the consultant’s responsibility to appropriately select the smoke control,  
smoke containment or smoke management systems, suitable for the building, life 
safety  and property protection. 

 
4.1.3.  Design submittals shall be complete with design criteria, design objective, calcula-
tions, engineering analysis, equipment specifications and riser diagrams with lay-
outs and schematics in compliance with this chapter. 

 

4.2.  Installation 

4.2.1. 

 
4.2.2. 

 
4.2.3. 

 
4.2.4. 

 

The installation of smoke control systems shall be carried out by the Civil Defence 
approved smoke control contractors under the supervision of Consultant. 

The installation contractor shall not commence work on site without receiving Civil 
Defence stamped and approved drawings from the Consultant. 

It is contractors responsibility to adhere to consultant’s Civil Defence approved 
drawings and the manufacturer’s installation guidelines and specifications. 

The consultant shall ensure that the smoke control system installation complies 
with the Civil Defence approved drawings and specifications. 

4.3.  Inspection and Acceptance 

Inspection and acceptance shall be the main consultant’s responsibility.  

4.3.1. 
 
4.3.2.  Ducting shall be inspected and certified by the ducting manufacturer or supplier. 

The consultant shall sign off the ducting installation based on the manufacturer or 
supplier’s onsite ducting certification. 

 
4.3.3. 

 

The main consultant shall inspect the contractor’s work during installations and 
ensure that intended pressure differences, door opening forces, air velocities, 
make-up air velocities, extract rate, duct routing, clear head rooms etc. are in com-
pliance with this chapter and the Civil Defence approved drawings. 

4.4.  Inspection and Maintenance 

 

4.4.1. 

 
4.4.2. 

The building owner, his appointed representative and the facility management 
shall be responsible to ensure that the facility smoke management system per-
forms as intended, in compliance with this chapter. The acceptance of the system 
shall be jointly signed off by the consultant, the contractor and the owner repre-
sentative. 

It is the owner’s responsibility to ensure that the smoke control systems are in-
spected regularly and maintained in accordance with Section 4 of this chapter. 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 867 of 1348 

5. Acceptance and Maintenance of Smoke Control Systems 
 

 

5.1.  Pressurization Systems - Acceptance Test and Maintenance 

 

5.1.1. 

Pressurization systems for Stairs, lift hoistway lobbies, vestibules, corridor etc. shall 
be tested and maintained in accordance with Table 10.28. for acceptance. 

 

Table 10.28.: Acceptance Test for Stair Pressurization Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  ACCEPTANCE 

TEST 

 

1. GENERAL 
 
i. 

The pressurization System acceptance testing shall demonstrate that the 
final integrated smoke-control system installation complies with the specific 
design and is functioning as intended and that its operating parameters 
comply with the design objectives defining pressure differences, air veloci-
ties and door opening force. 

ii.  Pressurization systems shall prove that the system can be activated either 
manually or automatically, where applicable, by the building fire alarm sys-
tem, that all components are placed in the appropriate operating modes in 
accordance with the control matrix and that the design objectives are met. 
In addition, the acceptance testing shall enable to evaluate potential inter-
actions that can take place between different smoke-control systems and 
components installed in the buildings. 

iii. 

v. 

iv.  Prior to the acceptance testing, all building equipment shall be placed in the 
normal operating mode, including equipment that is not used to implement 
smoke control. 
The following four acceptance tests shall be carried out.                                                      
a.  Activation of pressurization system                                                                                    
b. Pressure difference test                                                                                                         
c.  Air velocity test                                                                                                                           
d. Door opening force test 

 
2.  ACTIVATION OF PRESSURIZATION SYSTEM 

 

i. 

Regardless of the activation methods mentioned below,  these tests shall 
demonstrate that the pressurization system can be activated in case of a fire 
and is capable to operate in accordance with the specific building design.                             
a. Activation by the building Fire Detection and Alarm System:                                   
This test shall be to operate the automatic fire detection system (smoke de-
tector) by introducing  smoke into the detector head. This shall in turn oper-
ate the central fire alarm panel, thus activating the pressurization system.                              
b. Activation by Manual Switches:                                                                                        
This test shall be to activate pressurization system by means of manual 
switch at the Smoke Control Panel (SCP) 

 
3.  PRESSURE DIFFERENCE TEST 

 

i. 

 

This acceptance test shall measure pressure differences across the closed 
door separating a pressurized and an unpressurized space and to determine 
the pressure distribution (field) within the pressurized space. The test(s) 
shall be carried out as follows.                          

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 868 of 1348 

 

Table 10.28.: Acceptance Test for Stair Pressurization Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  ACCEPTANCE 

TEST 

a. Initiate the pressurization system either automatically or manually.                            
b. Close all relevant doors.                                                                                                      
c. Measure pressure differences across the closed door separating a pressur-
ized and an unpressurized space on at least 3 lowest and 3 top floors of the 
building. If the vertical distance between floors where measurements were 
carried out exceeds 6 floors, additional measurement on one of the middle 
floors shall be carried out.                                                                                    d. 
Additional pressure difference measurements shall be carried out on floors 
with different air release paths. These readings shall be taken using a cali-
brated manometer, with the appropriate tube connections. 

ii.     The calibration of all test equipment shall be such that the measurements 

are accurate to at least 5 %.  

iii.  Each pressure difference reading shall be continuously taken and logged for 

at least 10 seconds.  

iv.  Pressure differences measured relative to this acceptance test shall comply 

v. 

vi 

with specific design pressure differences.  
The design objective requirement is considered to be fulfilled if the meas-
ured values of pressure differences deviate less than 10 % of the design val-
ue.  
For the super high-rise buildings it is recommended to carry out pressure 
differences measurements on all building floors.  

 
4.  AIR VELOCITY TEST 

 

i. 

ii. 

This acceptance test shall measure the air velocity through an open door 
separating a pressurized and an unpressurized space. The measurement of 
the flow velocity through the relevant doors shall be taken with all other 
doors open or closed in accordance with the specific design assumptions. 
The test(s) shall be carried out as follows, a.  Initiate the pressurization sys-
tem either manually or automatically. b. Open or close all relevant doors. c. 
Measure air velocity through the relevant door.  d.  For each door at least 8 
measurements shall be taken, uniformly distributed over the doorway, to 
establish an accurate air velocity. Calculate the mean of these measure-
ments or alternatively move an appropriate measuring device steadily over 
the cross section of the open door and record the average air velocity. 

iii.  These measurements shall be taken with an open air release path conse-

quently on following floors, in order to determine if the air release system 
has been properly designed and balanced.    

iv.  These readings shall be taken using a calibrated anemometer. 
v. 

The calibration of all test equipment shall be such that the measurements 
are accurate to at least 5 %.   

vi.  Air velocities measured relative to this acceptance test shall comply with 

specific design air velocities.  

vii.  The design objective requirement is considered to be fulfilled if an average 

value of air velocity is not less than 90 % of the design value.   

viii.  For super high-rise buildings it is recommended to carry out air velocity 

measurements on all building floors. 

 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 869 of 1348 

 

Table 10.28.: Acceptance Test for Stair Pressurization Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  ACCEPTANCE 

5.  DOOR OPENING FORCE TEST 

TEST 

 

i. 

ii. 

This acceptance test is to measure the door opening force on the doors be-
tween the pressurized and unpressurized spaces.   
The test(s) shall be carried out as follows.                                                                            
a. Measure door opening force without the pressurization system operating.                                                                                                                                     
b. Close all relevant doors                                                                                                          
c. Initiate the pressurization system operation either manually or automati-
cally.                                                                                                                                             
d. Actuate the pressure differential system.                                                                          
e. Fasten the end of the force measuring device (e.g. a spring balance) to 
the door handle, on the side of the door in the direction of opening, release 
any latching mechanism, if necessary holding it open.                                                                 
f. Pull on the free end of the force measuring device, noting the highest val-
ue of force measured as the door opens.                                                                             
g. Measure door-opening force at all doors located within the escape route. 
h. For each door take at least 3 measurements and calculate the mean of 
these measurements. 

iii.  These readings shall be taken using a calibrated dynamometer.    
iv.  The calibration of all test equipment shall be such that the measurements 

are accurate to at least 5 %.   

v.  Door opening forces measured relative to this acceptance test shall comply 

with specific design door opening forces and in particular shall not exceed 
the maximum allowable door opening force of 133 N. 

vi.  The door opening force measurements shall be taken for all doors located 

within the escape routes.  

1.  GENERAL 

 

i.  Maintenance is a combination of all technical, administrative and manageri-
al actions taken with the objective of ensuring the specified function of the 
pressurization system.  

ii.  Pressurization systems, including the smoke detection system or any other 
type of fire alarm system used, the Smoke Control Panel (SCP), the fans, the 
equipment power supply arrangements and the automatically operated 
ventilation equipment, shall be subject to a regular maintenance and func-
tional testing procedure.  

iii.  The consultant shall be responsible for the design of the system and shall 

provide the Owner and the facility management with a maintenance check 
list. Records shall be kept of all maintenance and functional testing by the 
facility management.  

iv.  The entire pressurization system shall be properly inspected, serviced and if 

necessary repaired strictly in accordance with the manufacturer’s and sup-
plier’s instructions.  
The equipment shall be included in the Building Services maintenance 
schedule.   

v. 

vi.  A maintenance and functional test schedule shall be prepared.  
vii.  All unsatisfactory findings or defects found regarding the maintenance of 

the equipment shall  be recorded in the log book and reported to the facility 
management.  

viii.  Maintenance of equipment shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's 

instructions.  

ix.  Records shall indicate all reports regarding repeated faults that can be 

deemed to be design faults.    

2. MAINTENANCE 
OF PRESSURIZA-
TION SYSTEMS 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 870 of 1348 

Table 10.28.: Acceptance Test for Stair Pressurization Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

3.  MAINTENANCE 
TEST SCHEDULE 

1.  WEEKLY TESTS 

 

i. 

ii. 

The smoke Control Panel (SCP) shall be visually inspected for abnormal condi-
tions, faults and availability of normal power. 
Each week the pressure differential system shall be actuated. While the sys-
tem is operating, checks shall be made that the fans are running satisfactorily 
and that all components essential to supply air to pressurized spaces, to con-
trol pressure differences and to achieve air velocities are working properly.  
iii.  Each week the fuel level for the secondary power supply shall be checked so 
that there is sufficient fuel to run the generator for the required time, if the 
secondary power supply is a generator. 

 
2.  MONTHLY TESTS 

 

i. 

In addition to Weekly tests, the following tests shall be conducted monthly.                  
a. A failure of the primary power supply shall be simulated and ensure that 
the system has switched automatically to the secondary power supply. If the 
secondary power supply is provided by a diesel generator it shall energize the 
system for a minimum of 1 hour.                                                                                     
b. A zero airflow condition shall be simulated and checked that the stand-by 
fans are running if they are provided. 

 
3.  YEARLY TESTS 

 

i. 

Every 12 months, in addition to the manufacturer's recommendation and 
monthly tests, the entire pressurization system shall be tested by following 
the acceptance test procedures detailed in Section 4. 

 
4.  MODIFICATIONS 

 

i. 

The entire pressurization system shall be re-tested in accordance with                   
Section 4, following any modification to the building such as alterations to 
internal partitions, extensions and alterations to the pressurization system 
that could affect the pressurization system. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 871 of 1348 

5.2.  Kitchen Hood Ventilation Systems 

 

5.2.1. 

Kitchen hood ventilation systems shall be tested and maintained in accordance with 
Table 10.29. for acceptance. 

Table 10.29.: Kitchen Hood Testing and Maintenance 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. INSPECTION AND 

MAINTENANCE 

1.  GENERAL 
 
i. 

ii. 

The entire exhaust system shall be inspected for a grease buildup by a 
properly trained, qualified, and Civil Defence listed company. 
The cooking equipment that collects grease below the surface, behind the 
equipment, or in the cooking equipment flue gas exhaust, such as griddles 
or charbroilers, shall be inspected and, if found with grease accumulation, 
shall be cleaned. 

iii.  Hoods, grease removal devices, fans, ducts, and other appurtenances shall 
be cleaned to remove combustible contaminants prior to surfaces becom-
ing heavily contaminated with grease or oily sludge. 

iv.  Grease filters shall be inspected and cleaned. 
v.  Where disposable filters are used, they shall be replaced periodically as 

per manufacturer’s specifications. 

 
2.  MONTHLY INSPECTION 

 

i. 

Systems serving solid fuel cooking operations, shall be inspected for grease 
accumulation. 

 
3.  QUARTERLY INSPECTION 

 

i. 

Systems serving high-volume cooking operations, such as 24-hour cooking, 
charbroiling, or wok cooking, at commercial kitchens, hotel and hospital 
kitchens. 

 
4.  SEMIANNUAL INSPECTION 

 

i. 

Systems serving moderate-volume cooking operations such as restaurants, 
labour accommodations and staff accommodations shall be inspected for 
grease accumulation and ventilation system operation. 

 
5.  ANNUAL INSPECTION 

 

i. 

Systems serving low-volume cooking operations, such as residential, day 
camps, seasonal businesses, or event centers shall be inspected for grease 
accumulation. 
The hood ventilation system of all kitchens shall be annually inspected. 

ii. 
iii.  All cooking equipment shall be inspected and serviced for proper function-

ing. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 872 of 1348 

6.  Smoke Control System Material Test Standards and              

Approval. 
 

6.1. Acceptable Test Standards and criteria 
 

6.1.1.  All the Materials, Systems, Assemblies, Control Systems, Ducts, Fans, Insulation, 

Pipes and fittings, equipment, Products and Accessories, referred to in this chapter 
shall be Listed, Approved and Registered by the Civil Defence Material Approval 
Department. 

 
6.1.2.  There is no year of edition mentioned against any test standards. It is the intent of 
Civil Defence to invite the customers seeking laboratory tests and the test laborato-
ries to follow the “LATEST EDITION OF THE TEST STANDARD, AS AND WHEN THEY 
ARE UPGRADED/REVISED/AMENDED, TO THE DATE.” 

6.1.3.  Smoke Damper (With 1.5 mm galvanized steel frame) 

i.  ANSI/UL 555S, Standard for Smoke Dampers. 
ii.  EN 12101-8: Smoke and heat control systems—Smoke control dampers. 
iii. ISO 21927-8: Smoke and heat control systems — Specification for smoke control 

dampers. 

iv. EN 1366-10 Fire resistance tests for service installations. Smoke control damp-

ers.  

 

6.1.4.  Fire Damper (90 minutes and 3 hour fire rated with 1.2 mm galvanized steel 

frame) 

i.  ANSI/UL 555, Standard for Fire Dampers. 
ii.  EN 1366-2 Fire resistance tests for service installations. Fire dampers. 
iii. EN 13501-3: Fire classification of construction products and building elements - 

Part 3: Classification using data from fire resistance tests on products and ele-
ments used in building service installations: fire resisting ducts and fire dampers 

 

6.1.5.  Combination (Fire/Smoke) Damper (90 minutes and 3 hour fire rated with 1.5 mm 

galvanized steel frame) 

i.  ANSI/UL 555, Standard for Fire Dampers, and ANSI/UL 555S, Standard for Smoke 

Dampers. 

ii.  EN 1366-2 Fire resistance tests for service installations. Fire dampers. 
iii. EN 1366-10 Fire resistance tests for service installations. Smoke control damp-

ers.  

iv. EN 13501-3: Fire classification of construction products and building elements - 

Part 3: Classification using data from fire resistance tests on products and ele-
ments used in building service installations: fire resisting ducts and fire dampers. 

 

  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 873 of 13486.1.6.  Smoke Control Panel (SCP) and Power Supply (With 3 hour battery backup,  enclo-

sure rating of UL 864, IP 65 or above) 

i.  ANSI/UL 864, Standard for Control Units and Accessories for Fire Alarm Systems, 

category UUKL, for their intended purpose. 

ii.  ISO 21927-9:Smoke and heat control systems — Specification for control equip-

ment.  

iii. ISO 21927-10: Smoke and heat control systems — Specification for power output 

devices.  

iv.  EN 12101-10: Smoke and heat control systems. Power supplies. 
 

6.1.7.  Smoke Curtains  or Draft Curtains (Rated at 6000 C for 2 hours) 

i.  ISO 21927-1: Smoke and heat control systems, Specification for smoke barriers.  
ii.  EN 12101-1: Smoke and heat control systems. Specification for smoke barriers.  
 

6.1.8.  Fire Curtains (Rated at 11000 C for 2 hours) 

i.  UL 10D. Standard for Fire Curtains. 
ii.  BS 476; part 22, Fire Resistance Test to Building Material  
iii. BS 8524-1:Active fire curtain barrier assemblies Part 1 - Specification 
iii. BS EN 1634-1, Fire resistance and smoke control tests for door and shutter as-

semblies 

 

6.1.9.  Natural Smoke and Heat Vents (Rated at 3000 for 30 minutes) 

i.  ISO 21927-2: Smoke and heat control systems — Specification for natural smoke 

and heat exhaust ventilators. 

ii.  FM 4430, Heat and Smoke Vents. 
iii. UL 793, Standard for Automatically Operated Roof Vents for Smoke and Heat 
iv. EN 12101-2: Smoke and heat control systems. Specification for natural smoke 

and heat exhaust ventilators.  

 

6.1.10.  Mechanical Extract Fans and Jet Fans (Rated at 4000 for 2 hours) 

i.   EN-12101-3: Smoke and heat control systems. Specification for powered smoke 

and heat exhaust ventilators. 

ii.  UL 705, Standard for Power Ventilators. 
iii. EN 13501-4: Fire classification of construction products and building elements - 

Part 4: Classification using data from fire resistance tests on components of 
smoke control systems. 

 

6.1.11.  Powered Smoke and Heat Exhaust Ventilators (Rated at 4000 for 2 hours) 

i.   EN 12101-3: Smoke and heat control systems. Specification for powered smoke 

and heat exhaust ventilators. 

ii    EN ISO 13350: Industrial fans. Performance testing of jet fans. 
iii. EN 13501-4: Fire classification of construction products and building elements - 

Part 4: Classification using data from fire resistance tests on components of 
smoke control systems 

iv. UL 705, Standard for power ventilators  

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 874 of 13486.1.12.  Ducts for Smoke control systems (Type A, Rated for both fire outside and Type B, 

fire outside and inside, 1 hour and 2 hour fire rated,  tested and approved for fire 

rating, stability, integrity and non combustible insulation.)  

i. 

BS 476, Part 24, Fire tests on building materials and structures. Method for 
determination of the fire resistance of ventilation ducts. 
ISO 21927-7: Smoke and heat control systems—Smoke control Ducts. 

ii. 
iii.  Class 0 or Class 1 in accordance with ANSI/UL 181. 
iv.  ASTM E2816-12:  HVAC ducts fire resistance 
v. 
vi.  EN 1366-8: Fire resistance tests for service installations - Part 8: Smoke extrac-

EN 1366-1: Fire resistance test for service installations. PART 1: DUCTS. 

tion ducts 

vii.  UNE-EN 1366-9: Fire resistance tests for service installations - Part 9: Single 

compartment smoke extraction ducts 

viii.  EN 13501-4: Fire classification of construction products and building elements - 

Part 4: Classification using data from fire resistance tests on components of 
smoke control systems. 

ix.  EN 12101-7: Smoke and Heat control Systems. Smoke duct sections. 
 

 

6.1.13.  Duct and Pipe Insulation  as assembly including Pipe and Duct insulation, cover-

ings, linings fasteners, adhesives. 

i.  NFPA 274– Standard test method to evaluate fire performance characteristics 

of pipe insulation (Pass with full acceptance criteria of NFPA 274) 
FM 4924– Pipe and Duct Insulation 

ii. 
 

6.1.14.  Air cleaners  

ANSI/UL 867 Standard for Electrostatic Air Cleaners.  

i. 
 

6.1.15.  Air Filters  

Class 1 or Class 2 in accordance with ANSI/UL 900. 

i. 
ii.  ANSI/UL 867 
 

6.1.16.  Grease Filters  

UL 1046, Standard for Grease Filters for Exhaust Ducts. 

i. 
 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 875 of 1348 

6.1.1.7. Fire rated Cable, Certified for 120 minutes fire rating 

i. 

EN 50200, Method of test for resistance to fire of unprotected small cables for 
use in emergency circuits 

ii.    UL  2196, Standard for Fire Test for Circuit Integrity of Fire-Resistive Power, 

Instrumentation, Control, and Data Cables  

iii.    BS 8434-2, Methods of test for assessment of the fire integrity of electric ca-
bles. Test for unprotected small cables for use in emergency circuits. BS EN 
50200 with a 930° flame and with water spray . 

iv.    BS 7629-1, Electric cables. Specification for 300/500 V fire resistant screened 

cables having low emission of smoke and corrosive gases when affected by 
fire. Multicore and multipair cables. 

v.    BS 6387, Test method for resistance to fire of cables required to maintain cir-

cuit integrity under fire conditions. 

vi.    IEC 60331-1, Tests for electric cables under fire conditions. 
vii.    IEC 60331-2, Tests for electric cables under fire conditions. 
viii.   IEC 60332-2-2, Tests on electric and optical fibre cables under fire conditions. 
ix.    IEC 60332-3-10, Tests on electric and optical fibre cables under fire conditions. 
x.      IEC 60331-2, Tests for electric cables under fire conditions. 
xi.     UL 1724, Outline of Investigation for Fire Tests for Electrical Circuit Protective 

Systems. 

xii.    UL 1685, Standard for Vertical-Tray Fire-Propagation and Smoke-Release Test 

for Electrical and Optical-Fiber Cables. 

xiii.   UL 1666, UL 1666 Test for Flame Propagation Height of Electrical and Optical-

Fiber Cables Installed Vertically in Shafts. 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 876 of 1348Chapter 11 
LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM 
GAS CODE OF PRACTICE 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 877 of 1348In this Chapter: 

Î  Design and installation requirements of LP Gas systems. 
Î  LP Gas usage in flame shows and food trucks. 
Î  Safety requirements for LPG usage and re-filling 

Intent of the Chapter 

• 

• 
• 

To  lay  down  the  technical  requirements  for  design  and  installation  of  LPG 
cylinder  and  central  gas  systems  as  per  best  practices. 
To lay down the requirements for safe handling of LP Gas. 
To ensure material and equipment involved in LPG installation are tested and 
comply  with  international  standards. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 878 of 1348 

In this Chapter : 

  Design and Installation 
requirements of LP Gas 
systems 

  LPGas usage in flame shows 

and food trucks. 

  Safety requirements for LPG 

usage and re-filling. 

1. Definitions 

Intent of the Chapter 

  To lay down the technical  requirements  for design and 
installation of LPG Cylinder and Central Gas systems as 
per best practices. 

  To lay down the requirements for safe handling of LP- 

Gas . 

  To ensure material and equipment involved in LPG 

installation are tested and comply to international 
standards.  

It is a suggested requirement recommended by Civil Defence but not mandatory. 

Approved and registered by individual Emirates’ Civil Defence material department. 

It is a mandatory requirement by Civil Defence. 

  
1.1.  Shall  
 
 
1.2.  Should 
 
 
1.3.  Listed 
 
 
1.4.  Gallon. U.S. Standard and Kilogram  
 

1 U.S. gal = 3.785 L., 1 Kg = 1.8 Liter, Approx. (Units used in this chapter are either Kilograms 
or US Gallons. Conversion of Liter to Kg without  knowing specific density, Liter conversion 
to Kg is approximate.) 

 
1.5.a.  LPG (Liquefied Petroleum Gas )  
 

Liquefied petroleum gas is classified as flammable, liquefied, and fuel. Any material having a 
vapor pressure not exceeding that allowed for commercial propane that is composed pre-
dominantly of the following hydrocarbons, either by themselves or as mixtures: propane, 
propylene, butane (normal butane or isobutane), and butylenes. LPG is stored in liquid form 
at high pressures. Because the LPG is twice heavier than air, if leaked from container, flows 
back to lower levels and accumulates around container. Most commonly used cooking fuel 
in UAE is LPG. 

 
1.5.b.  LNG (Liquefied Natural Gas )  
 

Liquefied natural gas is classified as flammable, cryogenic, and fuel. Any material having a 
vapor pressure not exceeding that allowed for commercial propane that is composed pre-
dominantly of the following hydrocarbons, either by themselves or as mixtures: propane, 
propylene, butane (normal butane or isobutane), and butylenes. LNG is stored in liquid 
form at high pressures.  

 
1.5.c.  CNG (Compressed Natural Gas )  
 

Compressed natural gas (CNG) is natural gas, Methane stored at high pressure. CNG is 
stored in gas form at high pressures. CNG is lighter than air and when leaked from contain-
ers, disperses up into air above. 

 
1.5.d.  SNG (Substitute Natural Gas /Synthetic Natural Gas)  
 

Synthetic Natural Gas (SNG) is a blend of Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG) and diluent. The 
possible diluents are Bio gas, Digester Gas, Landfill Gas, Nitrogen and Compressed Air. How-
ever the commonly used diluent is compressed Air. SNG provides direct replacement for 
Natural Gas.  SNG is lighter than LPG and can only be supplied through piping network from 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 879 of 1348 

1.6.  LPG Cylinder 
 

An approved container designed to be moved readily, as opposed to a container designed 
for stationary installations. 

 
1.7.  LPG Tank 
 

An approved container either vertical or horizontal, designed for stationary and permanent 
installations. 

 
1.8.  Aboveground Tank 
 

An approved and listed container designed for aboveground service installed aboveground 
or on roof or podium open to air. 

 
1.9.  Underground Tank 
 

An approved and listed container designed for underground service installed underground 
at minimum depth required for underground service and covered with earth or sand. 

 
1.10.  Stationary Installation (Permanent Installation) 
 

An installation of LP-Gas containers, piping, and equipment for indefinite use at a particular 
location. An installation not normally expected to change in status, condition, or location. 
This installation requires Civil Defence approval. 

 
1.11.  Temporary Installation 
 

An installation of LPG cylinders, piping, and equipment at a particular location for a brief 
period of time, usually one day to 40 days during events and Ramadan. This installation is 
normally expected to change in status, condition, or location. Temporary LPG installations 
require Civil Defence approval. 

 
1.12.  Mounded Tank 
 

An approved and listed container designed for underground service installed above the 
minimum depth required for underground service and covered with earth, sand, or other 
material, or an ASME container designed for aboveground service installed above grade and 
covered with earth, sand, or other material. 

 
1.13.  LPG System  
 

An assembly consisting of one or more containers with a means for conveying LP-Gas from 
a container to dispensing or consuming devices that incorporates components that control 
the quantity, flow, pressure, and physical state (liquid or vapor) of the LP-Gas. 

 
1.14.  Gas Piping 
 

An installation of pipe, valves or fittings installed on a premises or in a building and utilized 
to convey fuel gas. 

 
1.15.  Pressure Relief Valve  
 

A type of pressure relief device designed to both open and close to maintain internal fluid 
pressure to a specified value. 

 
1.16.  Emergency Shutoff Valve  
 

Emergency shutoff valve is a positive shutoff valve that is equipped for remote closure and 
automatic shutoff using thermal (fire) activation or any other sensor. 

 
 1.17.  Vaporizer 
 

A device, other than a container, that receives LP-Gas in liquid form and adds sufficient heat 
to convert the liquid to a gaseous state. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 880 of 1348 

1.18.  Point of Transfer/ Filling Point  
 

The location where connections and disconnections are made or where LP-Gas is vented to 
the atmosphere in the course of transfer operations. 

 
1.19.  Overfilling Prevention Device (OPD)  
 

A safety device that is designed to provide an automatic means to prevent the filling of a 
container in excess of the maximum permitted filling limit. 

 
1.20.  Fixed Liquid Level Gauge  
 

A liquid level indicator that uses a positive shutoff vent valve to indicate that the liquid level 
in a container being filled has reached the point at which the indicator communicates with 
the liquid level in the container. 

A container constructed in accordance with the ASME Code. 

 
1.21.  ASME Container 
 
 
1.22.  Bulk Plant  
 

A facility where the primary function is to store LPG prior to further distribution. LPG is re-
ceived by cargo tank vehicle, railroad tank car, or pipeline, and then distributed by portable 
container (package) delivery, by cargo tank vehicle, or through gas piping. 

 
1.23.  Line Pressure Regulator  
 

A pressure regulator in accordance with the Standard for Line Pressure Regulators, ANSI Z-
21.80/CSA 6.22, with no integral overpressure protection device for LP-Gas vapor service 
designed for installation inside a building to reduce a nominal 2-psi inlet pressure to 14 in. 
w.c. (4.0 kPa) or less. 

 
1.24.  First-Stage Regulator  
 

A pressure regulator for LP-Gas vapor service designed to reduce pressure from the con-
tainer to 10.0 psig (69 kPag).  For example, for residential usage pressure is reduced to 1 psi 
(75 mbar) and reduced to 5 psi (350 mbar) for large commercial usage 

 
1.25.  Second-Stage Regulator  
 

A pressure regulator for LP-Gas vapor service designed to reduce first-stage regulator outlet 
pressure to 14 in. w.c. (4.0 kPag) or less. 

 
1.26.  Two-Stage Regulator System  
 

An LP-Gas vapor delivery system that combines a first-stage regulator and a second-stage 
regulator(s), or utilizes a separate integral two-stage regulator. 

 
1.27.  Fuel (LPG) Demand 
 

The maximum amount of gas input required per unit of time, usually expressed in cubic feet 
per hour, or in energy units like Btu/h (1 Btu/h = 0.2931 W). 

 
1.28.  Separation distance  
 

The minimum horizontal and vertical distance through air measured between the LPG Con-
tainer/Tank surface to the required safe distance. 

 
1.29.  LPG Riser 
  
 

A vertical pipe supplying fuel gas. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 881 of 1348 1.30.  Shaft 
 

An enclosed 2 hour fire rated space extending through one or more stories of a building, 
connecting vertical openings in successive floors, or floors and the roof. 

 
1.31.  Vent 
 

A pipe or other conduit composed of factory-made components, containing a passageway 
for conveying combustion products and air to the atmosphere, listed and labeled for use 
with a specific type or class of appliance. 

 
1.32.  Vent Piping 
 

Piping run from a pressure-regulating device to the outdoors, designed to provide a refer-
ence to atmospheric pressure. If the device incorporates an integral pressure relief mecha-
nism, a breather vent can also serve as a relief vent. 

 
1.33.  Flexible Connector 
 

A short *not exceeding 36 in. (0.91 m) overall length component of a piping system fabricat-
ed of flexible material (such as hose) and equipped with suitable connections on both ends, 
approved and certified for fuel gas. 

 

1.34.  Maximum allowed LPG quantity 
 

Maximum allowed LPG quantity referred to in this chapter is the total quantity installed in 
the building, either in a single cylinder/tank or in multiple  cylinder/Tank arrangements. 

 
1.35.  Flame Effect 
 

The combustion of flammable solids, liquids or gases to produce thermal, physical, visual or 
audible phenomena before an audience for entertainment. 

 
1.36.  Flame Effect System 
 

The complete assembly of interconnected components, devices, fittings that provide all of 
the functions necessary to fuel, monitor, supervise, generate, and control flame effects, 
monitoring of external conditions that affect operation, including the emergency shutdown 
of flame effects. 

 
1.37.  Temporary Flame Effect Event 
 

A Flame effect show, attended or unattended, installed on a temporary basis which does 
not exceed more than 40 days. 

 
1.38.  Permanent Flame Effect Event 
 

A Flame effect show installation, attended or unattended, which is permanent in nature and 
exceeds more than 40 days of daily operation. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 882 of 1348 

2.  LPG Systems Design and Installation  

 

2.1.  Intention 

2.1.1. 

 
2.1.2. 

 
2.1.3. 

 LPG is the most popular cooking fuel in UAE and this chapter addresses mainly the 
requirements for LPG in terms of Cylinders and Tanks. Other gases such as LNG, SNG 
and CNG are not directly covered in this chapter. However, the distribution, piping 
and fitting material, regulations regarding areas to be avoided in piping distribution 
and general safety requirements shall be as per LPG requirements and relevant in-
ternational standards. 

 LPG Cylinders storage (Waiting to be used), LPG Filling Plant, CNG Cylinders, SNG 
blending plants, Bulk LPG plants, Bulk Gas Dispensing Units, LNG Infrastructure distri-
bution etc. shall be evaluated by Civil Defence approved House of Expertise and 
comprehensive risk assessment report shall be submitted to Civil Defence for ap-
provals. 

 The LPG System requirements in this 
chapter are to address the following. 
 
2.1.3.1. LPG Systems for cooking and in-
dustrial burning, heating are in-
stalled in safe location and dis-
tances from buildings and struc-
tures to minimize the damages 
caused by fire and explosion.  

 
2.1.3.2. LPG installations are safe to use 

by regulating materials, equip-
ment and safety devices test 
standards and approvals. 

 
2.1.3.3. To ensure Fire-fighting access to 

LPG installation locations and 
provide protection systems to 
LPG installations to assist fire 
fighters during emergencies.  

Did You Know? 

LPG was first identified  in 
1910.  
 
Walter O. Snelling, a chem-
ist and explosives expert 
with the U.S. Bureau of 
Mines, was asked to wonder 
why the gasoline was half 
gone by the time it got 
home from retail. 
 
He experimented to device 
Cylinders to capture and re-
tain LPG, contributing to the 
evolution of LPG Cylinders. 

 
2.1.3.4. To ensure parking requirements of LPG bulk tankers are provided in the ini-

tial design and complied with. 

 

2.2.  General Requirements for LPG Systems 

2.2.1.  The materials, equipment including LPG cylinders, Tanks, piping, fittings, gauges , 

valves etc. shall be approved and listed by Civil Defence.  

 
2.2.2.  All LPG Designers, installers, commissioners and maintenance personnel shall be 

qualified, approved and licensed by Civil Defence. 

 
2.2.3.  NFPA 54 and NFPA 58 and manufacturer’s design, installation and maintenance 

guidelines shall be referred to for requirements not effected or covered under this 
Chapter for LPG system design, installation and maintenance. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 883 of 13482.2.4.  Cylinder type LPG installations in all new and modified buildings is not allowed. It is 

the strong intention of Civil Defence to install Centralized LPG systems in all new and 
modified buildings and developments. 

 
2.2.5.  Permission to install LPG cylinders is strictly subjected to approval of Civil Defence 

based on site and building inspection. 

 LPG Cylinders shall not be installed indoors. 

 LPG cylinders and pipe installation or distribution shall not be permitted in the fol-
lowing areas. 

 
2.2.6. 
 
2.2.7. 

 

In the ground under concrete flooring within building 

a.  
b.   Under building foundations 
c.   Within lift shafts and cavity walls 
d.  

In compartments or ducts dedicated for electrical switchgears, transformers or 
generators, garbage rooms, garbage chutes., refrigeration chambers, cold 
rooms, air handling rooms and ventilation or air-conditioning ducts. 

f.   Adjacent to pipes and vessels containing flammable, oxidizing, corrosive and 

g.  

other hazardous liquids and materials. 
In fire-fighting lobby, fire command centers, smoke stop lobbies, fire pump 
rooms, fire-fighting water tank rooms, sprinkler control valve rooms, fire 
fighting riser ducts, areas of refuge, protected corridors, protected staircases, 
bedrooms and other occupied area etc. 

 
2.2.8. 

2.2.9. 

 Electrical circuits shall not utilize gas piping or components as conductors. 
 
 All electrical connections between wiring and electrically operated control devices in 
a piping system shall conform to the requirements of NFPA 70. 
 

2.2.10.   Any essential safety control (in the vaporizer) depending on electrical current as the 
operating medium shall be of a type that will shut off (fail safe) the flow of gas in the 
event of current failure. 

 
2.2.11.   A warning sign or notice of minimum size of 800mm x 600 mm shall be permanently 
and legibly displayed at the front of the installation. In Arabic and English conveying, 
"LPG / HIGHLY FLAMMABLE / NO SMOKING / NO NAKED LIGHTS". Warning sign shall 
also have Emergency contact number of the LPG Contractor and concerned facility 
personnel. 

 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 884 of 13482.3.  LPG System Equipment 

 2.3.1.   LPG Cylinders 

 
2.3.1.1. There are generally 5 sizes of LPG cylinders being used in UAE. 2 Kg, 5 Kg, 

12Kg, 22 Kg and 44 Kg capacity cylinders. 2 Kg and 5 Kg cylinders are used by 
campers and picnickers. 22 Kg cylinders are generally used for domestic and 
household cooking purposes. The 44 Kg cylinders are used by commercial 
kitchens and restaurants.  

 
2.3.1.2. LPG Cylinders shall be listed and approved by Civil Defence. The Civil De-

fence approval is based on the cylinder designs and fabrications tested and 
approved by Civil Defence laboratories with the test standards as per             
Section 6 of this chapter. 

 
2.3.1.3. LPG Cylinders shall be inspected and revalidated by manufacturers and LPG 

suppliers every 5 years. Any cylinder that fails in verification of any of the 
following criteria, shall not be refilled or continued in service. 

 

 

a.  The cylinder is checked for exposure to fire, dents, cuts, digs, gouges, 

and corrosion. 

b.  Aluminum Cylinders or parts involved in fire and heat exposure shall be 

permanently removed from service.  

c.  The cylinder protective collar (where utilized) and the foot ring are intact 

and are firmly attached. 

d.  The cylinder is painted or coated to retard corrosion. 
e.  The cylinder pressure relief valve indicates no visible damage, corrosion 

of operating components, or obstructions. 

f.  There is no leakage from the cylinder or its appurtenances that is detect-

able without the use of instruments. 

g.  The cylinder is installed on a firm foundation and is not in contact with 

the soil. 

h.  A cylinder that passes the visual examination shall be marked with the 

month and year of the examination with requalification label. 

i.  The results of the visual inspection shall be documented, and a record of 
the inspection shall be retained for a 5-year period. Stamped copies shall 
be with both supplier and owner. 

j.  Cylinders shall incorporate protection against physical damage to cylin-
der appurtenances and immediate connections to such appurtenances 
when not in use 

k.  Cylinders shall be marked as provided in the regulations, rules, or code 

under which they are fabricated. 

 2.3.2.   LPG Tanks 

 
2.3.2.1. There are generally various sizes of LPG Tanks being used in UAE, 120 Gal, 

500 Gal, 1000 Gal, 2000 Gal. 10,000 to 30,000 Gal tanks are also installed for 
industrial usage or huge developments fuel supplies. 

 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 885 of 13482.3.2.2. LPG Tanks shall be designed, fabricated, tested, and marked (or stamped) in 

accordance with the requirements of Section 6.  

 
2.3.2.3. LPG Tanks shall be inspected and revalidated by manufacturers and LPG sup-
pliers every 5 years. Any Tank that fails in verification of any of the following 
criteria, shall not be refilled or continued in service. 

 

a.  The Tank is checked for exposure to fire, dents, cuts, digs, gouges, and 

corrosion. If found unsatisfactory, shall be removed from service. 

b.  Heating or cooling coils shall not be installed inside Tanks.  
c.  Field welding shall be permitted only on saddle plates, lugs, pads, or 

brackets that are attached to the container by the container manufactur-
er 

d.  The Tank is painted or coated to retard corrosion. 
e.  Above ground Tanks shall be retested hydrostatically every 5 years. Un-

derground LPG Tanks shall be retested every 10 years. 

f.  Containers shall be designed to be self-supporting without the use of guy 
wires and shall be designed to withstand the wind, seismic (earthquake) 
forces, and hydrostatic test loads anticipated at the site. 

g.  Design pressure shall be the pressure at the top head with allowance 
made for increased pressure on lower shell sections and bottom head 
due to the static pressure of the product. 

h.  Tanks shall be fabricated with lifting lugs or other means to lift the con-

tainer. 

i.  Tanks for use in permanent installations shall be designed with steel sup-

ports that allow the container to be mounted on and fastened to con-
crete foundations or supports. Steel supports shall be protected against 
fire exposure with a material having a fire resistance rating of at least 2 
hours. 

j.  Tanks shall be marked as provided in the regulations, rules, or code un-

der which they are fabricated. 

 

2.3.2.4. Bellow Ground LPG tanks shall be equipped with properly designed Cathodic 

protection. 

 
2.3.3.   Appurtenances (Fittings) 
 

2.3.3.1. Container appurtenances shall be fabricated of materials that are compati-
ble with LP-Gas and shall be resistant to the action of LP-Gas under service 
conditions. Gray cast iron and non metallic shall not be used for bodies of 
valves or regulators. 

 
2.3.3.2. Pressure-containing metal parts of appurtenances shall have a minimum 
melting point of 1500°F (816°C), except fusible elements and listed liquid 
level gauges. 

 
2.3.3.3. Gaskets used to retain LP-Gas in containers shall be resistant to the action of 
LP-Gas and shall be made of metal or material having melting point of 1500°
F (816°C). 

 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 886 of 1348 

 

2.3.3.4. Container openings shall be equipped with one of the following:  
 

a.   A positive shutoff valve in combination with either an excess-flow check 

valve or a backflow check valve, plugged. 

b.   An internal valve, plugged. 
c.   A backflow check valve, plugged. 
d.   An actuated liquid withdrawal excess-flow valve, normally closed and 

plugged, with provision to allow for external actuation.  

e.   A plug, blind flange, or plugged companion flange. 

 
2.3.4.   Pressure relief devices 
 

2.3.4.1.  Pressure relief valves shall be equipped with direct spring-loaded pressure 
relief valves conforming with applicable requirements of UL 132, Standard 
on Safety Relief Valves for Anhydrous Ammonia and LP-Gas, or other equiv-
alent pressure relief valve standards. See section 6. 

 
2.3.4.2.  Pressure relief valves settings for various Tanks shall be as per NFPA 54 and 

NFPA 58. 

 
2.3.4.3.  Shutoff valves shall not be installed between pressure relief devices and the 
container unless it is a listed pressure relief valve manifold having two pres-
sure relief device and only one pressure relief device in the manifold is de-
signed to shut off at any one time. 

 

 2.3.5.   Regulators 
 

2.3.5.1.  Single Stage regulators shall have a maximum outlet pressure settings of 1 
psig (7 kPag) and shall be equipped with integral overpressure shutoff de-
vice and additionally can be equipped integral pressure relief valve if appli-
cable, that shuts off the flow of LP-Gas vapor when the outlet pressure of 
the regulator reaches the overpressure limits as per test standards required 
by Section 6. 

 
2.3.5.2.  Two- Stage and second stage regulators shall have a maximum outlet pres-

sure settings of 1 psig (7 kPag) and shall be equipped with integral overpres-
sure shutoff device and additionally can be equipped integral underpres-
sure shutoff device and/overpressure relief valve if applicable,  that shuts 
off the flow of LP-Gas vapor when the outlet pressure of the regulator 
reaches the overpressure limits as per test standards required by Section 6. 

 

 2.3.6.   Overfilling prevention devices 
 

2.3.6.1.  All Cylinders shall be equipped with listed overfilling prevention devices and 

a fixed maximum liquid level gauge as per Section 6. 

 

 2.3.7.   Liquid Level gauging devices 
 

2.3.7.1.  All central Tanks filled by volume shall be equipped with listed liquid level 

gauging  devices tested as per Section 6. 

 
 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 887 of 1348 

 

2.3.8.   Pressure gauges 
 

2.3.8.1.  All Tanks and containers shall be equipped with listed liquid pressure 

gauging devices tested as per Section 6. 

 
2.3.8.2. 

 
2.3.8.3. 

 
2.3.9.   Pipes 
 

2.3.9.1. 

 
2.3.9.2. 

 
2.3.9.3. 

 
2.3.9.4. 

 
2.3.9.5. 

 
2.3.9.6. 

 
2.3.9.7. 

 
2.3.9.8. 

 
2.3.9.9. 
 
 

Pressure gauges shall be attached directly to the container opening or to 
a valve or fitting that is directly attached to the container opening. 

For high-pressure section, the gauge shall have a range of 0 to 300 psi (0 
to 20.1 bar) and for low-pressure section, range shall be 0 to 50 psi (0 
to 3.45 bar) 

Pipes used shall be Carbon Steel (Black Steel), brass, copper HDPE (High 
density Polyethylene, PE-100) and MDPE (Medium density Polyethylene, 
MDPE-80) . Pipes shall be listed with Civil Defence. See section 6. for ac-
ceptable test standards. 

LPG fill line shall be seamless steel to ASTM A53, ASTM A333 Gr 6 , API 5L, 
A106 GrB, API 5L GrB schedule 80. 

Vapour Phase piping must be minimum Schedule 40, Carbon Steel, Seam-
less      conforming to ASTM 106 Gr. B or API 5l with fittings conforming to 
ASTM A 105, Class 150.  

Design, fabrication, installation and testing of Piping must conform to AN-
SI B 31.3 – Process piping. 

A Hydrostatic Relief (UL approved) must be installed between two Valves 
in all lines in Liquid Phase service..  

Below ground Distribution pipe work shall be seamless steel to ASTM 
A53,  A 106  with Denso /Bitumen Tape wrapping  or HDPE(PE-100)/MDPE 
(PE-80) SDR11 . Any underground steel pipe work shall be equipped with 
properly designed Cathodic protection. Maximum Operating Pressure for 
HDPE(PE-100)/MDPE (PE-80) shall be calculated according to maximum 
soil temperature in UAE as + 40 oC including pressure reduction tempera-
ture factor as per ISO 13761.  

Above ground distribution pipe work shall be Seamless Carbon steel Pipe 
to ASTM A53, Grade B and ASTM 106, Grade B. 

Above Ground copper Pipe shall confirm to ASTM B280/ BS 2871. Copper 
piping cannot be used for Maximum Operating Pressure above 75 mbar 
and cannot be used for risers and droppers with length above 20 m.” Also 
copper pipe is not applicable in areas with potential risk of third party 
damage (at roofs and walls).  

Cast Iron pipes and fittings are not allowed in the system. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 888 of 1348 

 

2.3.9.10.  When connecting additional gas utilization equipment to a gas piping sys-
tem, the existing piping shall be checked to determine if it has adequate 
capacity.  If inadequate, the existing system shall be enlarged as required, 
or separate gas equipment of adequate capacity shall be provided. 

 
2.3.9.11.  The liquid LPG pipelines shall be painted in “Orange” and the vapor LPG 
pipelines in “Yellow” with the marking of the word “LP-Gas” at intervals 
of not more than 3M. 

 
2.3.10.  Tubing 
 

2.3.10.1.  Tubing used shall be Stainless Steel, Steel, brass, copper HDPE (High den-
sity Polyethylene) and MDPE (Medium density Polyethylene), as applica-
ble for relevant pipe work. See Section 6. for acceptable test standards. 

 

2.3.11.  Fittings 
 

2.3.11.1. Fittings used shall be Steel, brass and copper, HDPE (High density Polyeth-

ylene) and MDPE (Medium density Polyethylene). See Section 6. for ac-
ceptable test standards. 

 
2.3.12.  Flexible Hose 
 

2.3.12.1.  Hose, hose connections, and flexible connectors shall be fabricated of 

materials that are resistant to the action of LP-Gas both as liquid and va-
por. 

 
2.3.12.2.  Hose shall be designed for a working pressure of 350 psig (2.4 MPag) with 
a safety factor of 5 to 1 and shall be continuously marked with the manu-
facturer's name or trademark. See Section 6. for acceptable test stand-
ards. 

 
2.3.12.3.  The hose shall be securely connected to the appliance.  The use of rubber 
slip ends without hose clips shall not be permitted for domestic cylinders.  

 

2.3.13.  LPG Fired appliances 
 

2.3.13.1.  All the gas fired appliances such as cookers, heaters, boilers, vaporizers 

shall be tested and approved for such specific usage and safety.  

 
2.3.14.  Valves 
 

2.3.14.1.  All the system valves shall be suitable for the LPG pressure under service 

conditions. valves shall be listed and tested as per Section 6. 

 
2.3.14.2.  Hydrostatic relief valves designed to relieve the hydrostatic pressure that 

might develop in sections of liquid piping between two isolating valves 
shall be installed in each section.  Hydrostatic valves shall comply with UL 
132, Standard for Pressure Relief Valves for LPG. 

 
 
 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 889 of 1348 

 

2.3.14.3.  Emergency shut-off valve (ESV) shall be provided after the knockout pot.  

The ESV shall be linked to a release mechanism so that the valve can be 
closed from a safe distance of at least 3m from the LPG cylinders.  The 
ESV may incorporate fusible element which melts at not more than 250 
degree Celsius when exposed to fire, allowing the ESV to close by itself. 

 
2.3.14.4.  An accessible gas shutoff valve shall be provided at the upstream of each 
gas pressure regulator.  Where two gas pressure regulators are installed 
in series in a single gas line, a manual valve shall not be required at the 
second regulator. 

 
2.3.14.5.  Main gas shut-off valves controlling several gas piping systems shall be 

prominent and readily accessible for operation and properly installed so 
as to protect it from physical damage.  They shall be marked with a metal 
tag or other permanent means attached by the installing agency so that 
the gas piping systems supplied through them can be readily identified. 

 
2.3.14.6.  An exterior shut-off valve to permit turning off the gas supply to each 

building in an emergency shall be provided and plainly marked. Each pipe 
branch or pipe section should be equipped by isolation shut-off valves for 
isolation capability  

 
2.3.15.  Pigtail 
 

2.3.15.1.  Pigtail shall include a 6 mm flexible hose or tube, a 6 mm tee-check valve 

or excess flow valve and a 6 mm ball valve. 

 
2.3.15.2.  Flexible hose shall be fabricated of materials resistant to LPG reaction 

both in liquid and vapor state.  It shall be designed for a minimum 
bursting pressure of 1,750 psi (121 bar) and working pressure of 255 psi 
(17.5 bar).  The hose shall be marked “LPG” at intervals of not more than 
3m. 

 
2.3.15.3.  The tee-check valve shall be Underwriters Laboratories Inc. (UL) listed or 

it shall comply with other recognized/approved standard. 

 
2.3.15.4.  The ball valve shall be rated to at least 600 PSI (41 bar). See Section 6. for 

test standards. 

 
2.3.16.  Vaporizers 
 

2.3.16.1.  All the system valves shall be resistant to action of LPG under service con-

ditions. valves shall be listed and tested as per Section 6. 

 
2.3.16.2.  Vaporizers, where applicable, shall be constructed in accordance with the 
applicable provision of NFPA 58, ASME Code or other recognized pressure 
vessel codes and standards for a design pressure of 250 psi (17.24 bar) 
and shall be permanently and legibly marked with: 

a.  Markings required by the Code; 

 

 
 
 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 890 of 1348b.  The allowable working pressure and temperature for which it is de-

signed; and 

c.  The name and logo of the manufacturer. 

 
2.3.16.3.  Vaporizers shall be provided with a suitable automatic means to prevent 

the passage of liquid through the vaporizer to the vapor discharge piping.  
This feature shall be permitted to be integrated with the vaporizer or oth-
erwise provided in the external piping. 

 
2.3.17.  Gas Meters 
 

2.3.17.1. 

Installation and application of gas meters shall be in accordance with the 
relevant clauses in NFPA 54 and IGE/GM/8 in compliance with ESMA UAE 
requirements and must have design pressure same as relevant pipe work. 
All Gas meter must have valid calibration seal See Section 6. for accepta-
ble test standards. 

 
2.3.17.2.  Gas meters shall be selected for the maximum expected pressure and 

permissible pressure drop. 

 
2.3.17.3.  Vapor meters of the tin or brass case type of soldered construction shall 

not be used at pressure in excess of 1 psi (7 KPa). 

 

2.3.17.4.  Vapor meters of the die cast or iron case type shall be permitted to be 

used at any pressure equal to or less than the working pressure for which 
they are designed and marked. 

 
2.3.17.5.  Gas meters shall be located in ventilated spaces readily accessible for ex-

amination, reading, replacement or necessary maintenance. 

 
2.3.17.6.  Gas meters shall not be placed where they will be subjected to damage, 
such as adjacent to a driveway, under a fire escape, in public passages, 
halls or where they will be subjected to excessive corrosion or vibration. 

 
2.3.17.7.  Gas meters shall be located at least 1 m from sources of ignition. 
 
2.3.17.8.  Gas meters shall not be located where they will be subjected to extreme 
temperatures or sudden extreme changes in temperature.  Meters shall 
not be located in areas where they are subjected to temperatures beyond 
those recommended by the manufacturer. 

 
2.3.18.  Gas leak Detectors 
 

2.3.18.1.  Gas leak detectors shall be listed with Civil Defence as per test standards 

required by Section 6. 

 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 891 of 13482.3.19.  Gas leak Detection Control Panel 
 

2.3.19.1.  Gas leak detection Control Panel shall be listed with Civil Defence as per 

test standards required by Section 6. 

 

2.3.20.  Pipe Sleeves (For Pipe-in-Pipe/Containment) 
 

2.3.20.1.  Pipe sleeves shall be listed with Civil Defence as per test standards re-

quired by Section 4. 

 

 
2.3.21.  Over Pressure protection device 
 

2.3.21.1.  An over pressure protection device (OPD) is a device to protect the down 
stream installation and shut off the gas flow if the outlet pressure exceeds 
the set limit. The setting of the over pressure protecting device shall not 
be more than 30% of maximum operating pressure. 

 
2.3.21.2.  The over pressure protection device shall be designed to achieve the fol-

lowing.  

 

 

a.    Ensure reliable and continuous supply of LPG. 
b.    Protecting downstream system against over pressure 
c.    Protecting against failure of regulating devices.  

2.3.22.  Bypass Valve 
 

2.3.22.1.  Bypass valve for solenoid valves are generally not allowed. However, in 
case design includes by-pass for the Emergency Shut-off Valve (Solenoid 
valve), either a physical disconnection with plugged valves to be provided, 
or single valve lockable type in normally locked position shall be provided. 
Isolation valves should be provided upstream and downstream the sole-
noid valve to allow replacing without supply interruption . 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 892 of 1348 

2.4.  LPG Cylinder Installation 

 2.4.1.   Outdoor Cylinders 

 
2.4.1.1. Outdoor LPG Cylinders shall be installed as per Table 11.1. and other rele-
vant sections of this chapter. Material requirements shall be as per              
Section 2.3. and Section 6. 

 

Table 11.1: Outdoor LPG Cylinder Installation Guideline 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. LOCATION OF         

OUTDOOR 
CYLINDERS 

i.  Cylinders shall be located above ground and outdoors. 
ii.  Cylinders shall be placed on a firm, clean, dry and level base.  
iii. Cylinders are not allowed on roof, terrace and basements. 
iv. They shall be sited at ground level and a well-ventilated area. 
v.  They shall not be placed close to any passageways or exits and shall not cause 

any obstruction or danger to the occupants during gas leakage or fire.  

vi. Cylinders shall not be placed against glass walls and glazing. 

2. SEPARATION             

i.  3 m distance shall be maintained between cylinders to any fire exit route, Exit 

Doors, Exit Stairs, Windows, Public roads. 

DISTANCES OF            
OUTDOOR  
CYLINDERS 

ii.  3 m distance shall be maintained from cylinders to any Air intake units, Window 

type and Split Type AC units, Air vents, Balanced type flue outlets. 

iii. 3 m distance shall be maintained from cylinders to any parking lot, parking ramp 

or road.  

iv. 3 m distance shall be maintained between cylinders to Fire Accessways, Assem-

bly points and Fire Truck parking slot. 

v.  3 m distance shall be maintained from cylinders to drains, shaft openings, pits, 

opening to basements, ramp openings. 

vi. 10 m distance shall be maintained from cylinders to Fire Hydrant. 

 

Figure 11.1: Outdoor LPG Cylinder Separation Distances 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 893 of 1348 

 

Table 11.1: Outdoor LPG Cylinder Installation Guideline 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

3. QUANTITY ALLOWED 
FOR OUTDOOR           
CYLINDERS 

i.  For commercial usage, maximum quantity allowed is 4 cylinders of  44 
kg  is allowed in one group in the enclosure. 2 cylinders shall be main 
and 2 cylinders shall be reserve in a common manifold with isolation 
valves. 

ii.  For domestic residential usage, maximum quantity allowed is 2 cylinders 

of 24 kg is allowed in one group in the enclosure. 1 cylinder shall be 
main and 1 cylinder shall be reserve in a common manifold with isola-
tion valves. 

iii. Larger quantities, other than allowed above, shall require special ap-

provals from Civil Defence. 

4. PROTECTION TO              
OUTDOOR CYLINDERS 

i.  Cylinders shall be installed in louvered steel enclosures and locked 

against tampering and accidental damage. 

ii.  Cylinders located near parking lots, vehicle ramps and roads, shall be 

provided with steel barricades along with enclosures to safeguard cylin-
ders from vehicular collisions. 

5. VENTILATION 

i.  Cylinder enclosure shall be with louvers for ventilation. The total free 

area of the vents provided shall be at least 50% of the front side of the 
enclosure.  

 

Figure 11.2: Outdoor LPG Cylinder Maximum Quantities 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 894 of 1348 

 

 

Table 11.1: Outdoor LPG Cylinder Installation Guideline 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

6.  SAFETY                

PROVISIONS FOR               
OUTDOOR              
CYLINDERS 

i.  An approved gas-leak detection system shall be provided in the area or com-
partment where the internal LPG/CNG pipes and fittings are installed, with a 
local alarm connected to a main fire alarm panel.  

ii.  Remote Emergency shut-off valve shall be located at least 3 m away from 

the edge of the installation.  It shall be clearly marked and placed at a suita-
ble height for easy access during emergencies. 

iii. For Commercial kitchens provided with fixed fire suppression system, activa-

tion of the Suppression system shall automatically shut off the supply of 
LPG/CNG to the kitchen. 

iv. Any pipe penetration on the walls shall be suitably fire stopped to maintain 

the fire resistance of the walls. 

7.  SAFETY                  

i.  LPG cooking appliances shall not be used with CNG fuel unless it is certified 

PRECAUTIONS FOR 
OUTDOOR                 
CYLINDERS 

and approved to do so. 

ii.  There shall be no ignition source within 3 m from the cylinder installation.  
iii. All fixed electrical equipment within 1.5 m of the LPG/CNG installation shall 
be spark-proof and intrinsically safe in accordance with the relevant clause 
in NFPA 70.  

iv. Vaporizers shall not be installed inside the steel cabinet or within the same 

housing of the LPG/CNG cylinders. Wall-mounted vaporizers shall be located 
at least 1.2 m above the ground and 600 mm away from any LPG/CNG cylin-
der.  

v.  The cylinder enclosure shall only be used for LPG cylinder installation. No 

other usage or storage is allowed. 

vi. A warning sign or notice of minimum size of 800 mm x 600 mm shall be per-
manently and legibly displayed at the front of the installation. In Arabic and 
English conveying, "LPG / HIGHLY FLAMMABLE / NO SMOKING / NO NAKED 
LIGHTS" 

vii. The LPG installation shall be provided with at least one approved portable 

B:C rating dry chemical fire extinguisher having a minimum capacity of 9 kg. 

LPG CYLINDER EXPLOSION IN A LOCAL RESTAURANT FOR ILLUSTRATION 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 895 of 1348 

2.4.2.  

Indoor Cylinders 
 
2.4.2.1. LPG Cylinders installation indoors is not allowed generally. However,  if there 

is no location options available, indoor arrangements are allowed only for 
residential/ Apartments/ Flats and Villas, where permitted by Civil Defence. 

 
2.4.2.1. Indoor LPG Cylinders shall be installed as per Table 11.2. and other relevant 

sections of this chapter. Material requirements shall be as per Section 2.3. 
and Section 6. 

Table 11.2: Indoor LPG Cylinder Installation Guideline 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  LOCATION OF          

INDOOR CYLINDERS 

i.  Cylinder shall be placed in a ventilated above ground compartment which 
has at least one external wall. (Compartment should be at the perimeter 
of the building) 

ii.  Compartment shall be of masonry construction with ventilation on the 

front side. 

iii. The floor of the compartment shall be a smooth concrete base (rough sur-
face might cause sparking during loading/unloading of cylinders) contain-
ing no opening or drain where vapor may accumulate.  

iv. Cylinders or cylinder compartments are not allowed on roof, terrace, bal-
conies and basements, unless dedicated stair access and ventilated loca-
tion is available for such locations and approved by Civil Defence. Where 
Civil Defence approves such installations, all piping shall be copper tubes 
or welded steel and no hose connections are allowed. 

v.  Compartment shall not be close to any passageways or exits and shall not 

cause any obstruction or danger to the occupants during gas leakage or 
fire.  

2. SEPARATION                
DISTANCES OF           
INDOOR CYLINDERS 

i.  1.5 m distance shall be maintained between cylinder compartment to any 

fire exit route, Exit Doors, Exit Stairs, Windows and openings. 

ii.  3 m should be maintained between edge of the compartment and any ig-

nition sources/ cooking appliances. 

iii. 3 m distance shall be maintained from cylinders compartment to any Air 

intake units, Window type and Split Type AC units, Air vents, Balanced 
type flue outlets. 

iv. 3 m distance shall be maintained from cylinders compartment to any park-

ing lot, parking ramp or road.  

v.  3 m distance shall be maintained between cylinders compartment to Fire 

Accessways, Assembly points and Fire Truck parking slot. 

vi. 3 m distance shall be maintained from cylinders to drains, shaft openings, 

pits, opening to basements, ramp openings. 

vii. 10 m distance shall be maintained from cylinders compartment to Fire 

Hydrant. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 896 of 1348 

 

 

Figure 11.3: Indoor LPG quantity (Residential Kitchen) 

Figure 11.4: LPG Distribution inside Kitchen 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 897 of 1348 

 

Table 11.2: Indoor LPG Cylinder Installation Guideline 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

3. QUANTITY ALLOWED 

FOR INDOOR                       
CYLINDERS 

i.  For domestic residential usage, maximum quantity allowed indoors is 1 
cylinders of 24 kg. Another 24 kg spare is allowed but not recommend-
ed to be stored indoors. 

4.  PROTECTION TO           

i.  Cylinder compartment shall be installed in louvered steel enclosures 

CYLINDERS 

and locked against Children, tampering and accidental damage. 

ii.  Cylinders compartment located near parking lots, vehicle ramps and 

roads, shall be provided with steel barricades along with enclosures to 
safeguard cylinders from vehicular collisions. 

5.  SAFETY PROVISIONS 

FOR INDOOR                     
CYLINDERS 

i.  An approved gas-leak detector shall be provided, not more than 30 cm 
from finished floor level, within 5 m from LPG source and inside the cyl-
inder compartment.  

ii.  Gas detection system shall be interfaced with a local alarm connected 

to a main fire alarm panel.  

iii. Remote Emergency shut-off valve shall not be installed inside the cylin-
der compartment. The remote emergency shut-off valve shall be locat-
ed at least 1.5 m away from the compartment and at the kitchen exit 
door. It shall be clearly marked and placed at a suitable height for easy 
access during emergencies. 

iv. Any pipe penetration on the walls shall be suitably fire stopped to main-

tain the fire resistance of the walls. 

i.  LPG cooking appliances shall not be used with CNG fuel unless it is certi-

fied and approved to do so. 

ii.  There shall be no ignition source within 1.5 m from the cylinder installa-

tion.  

iii. All electrical connections and appliances shall be installed in accordance 

with the relevant electrical safety clauses in NFPA 70 and 72. 

iv. Vaporizers shall not be installed inside the cylinder compartment. Wall-

mounted vaporizers shall be located at least 1.8 m above the ground 
and 600 mm away from any LPG/CNG cylinder.  

v.  The cylinder compartment shall only be used for LPG cylinder installa-

tion. No other usage or storage is allowed. 

vi. A warning sign or notice of minimum size of 800 mm x 600 mm shall be 
permanently and legibly displayed at the front of the installation. In Ara-
bic and English conveying, "LPG / HIGHLY FLAMMABLE / NO SMOKING / 
NO NAKED LIGHTS" 

vii. The LPG installation shall be provided with at least one approved porta-
ble B:C rating dry chemical fire extinguisher having a minimum capacity 
of 9 kg. 

6.  SAFETY PRECAUTIONS 
FOR INDOOR                 
CYLINDERS 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 898 of 1348 

2.4.3.   Food Truck Cylinders 

 
2.4.3.1. LPG cylinders installed on Mobile Food Trucks shall comply as per                       

Table 11.3. and other relevant sections of this chapter. Material require-
ments shall be as per Section 2.3. and section 6. 

Table 11.3: Food Truck LPG Cylinder Installation Guideline 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  LOCATION OF 
FOOD TRUCK    
CYLINDERS 

Cylinders shall be placed in a permanent, fixed manifold at the back of the Mobile 
Food Truck in a metal ventilated cabinet, fully isolated from the Truck interiors. It 
can be single cabinet or two separate cabinets. See Figure 11.5. 
i.  Compartment shall be of steel construction with ventilation on the front side. 
ii.  Cylinders compartments are not allowed on the sides or on the Truck top. 

2.  QUANTITY         
ALLOWED ON 
FOOD TRUCKS 

i.  Maximum quantity allowed is 2 cylinders of  12 kg in one group in the enclo-

sure. 1 cylinder shall be main and 1 cylinder shall be reserve in a common man-
ifold with isolation valves. Additional / spare LPG cylinders are not allowed to 
be stored in the truck. 

3.  SAFETY              

i.  Food truck owners shall produce certificate from manufacturer confirming the 

PROVISIONS 
FOR FOOD 
TRUCK                 
CYLINDERS 

load carrying capacity of the truck. 

ii.  There shall be twin tires for the truck rear.  
iii. Cylinders shall be composite type only. 
iv. Piping shall be welded steel and up to as close as possible to cylinders with 

flexible hose connections as minimum as possible. 

v.  Provide emergency shut-off switch at both doors of truck interior. 
vi. Steel guard shall be provided at the exterior of cylinder enclosure. 
vii. LPG Leak detectors shall be installed at the enclosure and inside the truck near 

cooking platform. 

viii.Battery operated Heat detectors shall be installed for the Truck interior cover-

ing cooking platform. 

ix. All electrical wiring, lighting wiring, equipment wiring shall be concealed in a 

metallic containment pipe. 

x.  Kitchenhood suppression system shall be provided for the hood. 
xi. Civil Defence NOC shall be obtained only after inspection of the Food Truck. 

 

Figure 11.5: LPG for Food Truck 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 899 of 1348 

2.5.  LPG Central Tank Design and Installation 

 2.5.1.   General  requirements for all types of LPG Tank installations 

 

2.5.1.1. 

 
2.5.1.2. 

 
2.5.1.3. 

  This part of the guideline is intended for LPG tanks installed above 
ground, Mounded or on roof top of buildings. Section provides Tank sepa-
ration distances, allowable quantities, construction material, detection 
system, suppression system, fire fighting requirements and other system 
configurations in relation to  LPG Tank installations.  

  Central tank LPG is preferred to be installed underground or above 
ground locations rather than roof top locations. 

  LPG containers are not allowed to be installed on the roof of high-rise 
buildings. However, considering the UAE’s buildings and space constraint, 
it is permitted on roof of buildings up to 90 m., i.e., LPG tanks on Super-
highrise buildings (having height more than 90 m) is not allowed. LPG 
tanks on roof is subjected to strict compliance with Code and regulation 
requirements and Civil Defence approval. 

 
 Piping distribution, Filling and other requirements for all types of LPG Tank         
installations  

2.5.2. 

 

2.5.2.1. 

  Piping distribution requirements for any LPG Tank installations shall be as 
per Table 11. 4. 

Table 11.4: Piping Distribution requirements for LPG Central Tank installations 

ITEMS 

1. PIPING 

LPG PIPING DISTRIBUTION, FILLING AND OTHER REQUIREMENTS FOR 
LPG CENTRAL TANK INSTALLATIONS 

i.  No liquid phase LPG is allowed to be piped into the building. 
ii.  In infrastructure LPG distribution, liquid phase shall be permitted up to compound 

walls of the building. 

iii. Two Stage pressure regulators are essential for all LPG installations. First regulator 

to reduce system pressure to 5 psi (0.350 bar) for large commercial customers or 
to 75 mbar for residential customers and second stage regulator to reduce it fur-
ther to 0.5 psi (0.035 bar). However, in large infrastructure LPG networks, the 
pressure reduction shall be in accordance with length of the network and drop 
calculations. 

iv. LPG distribution shall not pass through the following areas.                                               

a. Exit routes,  Exit stairs , Exit corridors,  Exit lobbies                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
b. Public or assembly areas                                                                                                         
c. Public seating areas                                                                                                                            
d. Fire fighting lobbies,  Fire Command Center, Fire pump room, Control Rooms                                           
e. Lift shafts, Fire fighting riser shafts, Sprinkler valve rooms, garbage chutes, cavi-
ty walls, HVAC ducts                                                                                                                          
f.  Under building and equipment foundations                                                                        
g. Compartments or ducts dedicated for electrical switchgear, transformers, gene-
ra tors garbage rooms, refrigeration chambers, cold rooms                                                    
h.  Pipes and vessels containing   flammable, oxidizing,  corrosive and other haz-
ardous liquids and materials.   

v.  Piping can be routed through ceiling of basements with “pipe-in-pipe” arrange-

 

ment.  

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 900 of 1348 

ITEMS 

2. SHAFTS 

Table 11.4: Piping Distribution requirements for LPG Central Tank installations 

LPG PIPING DISTRIBUTION, FILLING AND OTHER REQUIREMENTS FOR 
LPG CENTRAL TANK INSTALLATIONS 

i.  LPG distribution inside any building shall be through dedicated shafts. 
ii.  LPG shafts for non-highrise buildings shall be 1 hour fire resistance rated shafts. 
iii. LPG shafts for highrise buildings shall be 2 hour fire resistance rated shafts. 
iv. Such shafts for LPG either masonry, steel, concrete or tested and approved fire 

rated particle board. 

v.  Any pipe penetration on the walls and shafts shall be suitably fire stopped to main-

tain the fire resistance of the walls.  

vi. Any duct dedicated for gas shall be naturally ventilated to open air. 

3.  PIPE-IN-PIPE     

i.  Pipe-in-Pipe (Containment) piping arrangement shall be provided where LPG pip-

ARRANGE-
MENT 

ing is passing through basements, studio apartments and show kitchens where 
kitchen is open to living or public spaces. 

ii.  Such Pipe-in-Pipe arrangements shall be with approved CPVC or Steel piping com-

plete with LPG leak detectors monitored by central LPG Control panel. 

iii. Where LPG piping needs drops from ceiling in the open space of a room, such as in 
school and research laboratories, shall be provided with steel support columns and 
steel pipe-in-pipe arrangement complete with leak detectors monitored by central 
LPG Control panel. 

i.  Filling connections shall be electrically classified areas without any ignition sources 

within 7.6 m. 

ii.  LPG filling connection shall be at 1 m from finished ground level. 
iii. Fill connections shall not be obstructed such that delivery hose connections are 

executed without obstructions. or wear and tear to the hose. 

iv. LPG fill line and connection arrangement shall be fully exposed outside the build-

ing. Where need arises to cover it aesthetically, fully ventilated or fully perforated 
enclosure is acceptable. 

v.  Fill connections shall be as close to the LPG Tank as possible. 
vi. Filling connections shall be located within LPG Tank fenced area. and when this is 
not possible, the fill connections shall be secured and guarded with lockable venti-
lated box against the tampering and vandalism. 

vii. If LPG tanks have top filling arrangements, safe access and platform with standard 

steps, handrail and guards shall be provided. 

viii.Filling connections should necessarily have a Vapour equalizing line to take care of 

any unexpected pressure rise during filling operations and shall be clearly labeled 
“LIQUID” or “VAPOUR” as appropriate. 

ix. When Butane, LPG and Propane filling or unloading connections are adjacent, they 

shall be clearly distinguished by labels and color coding. 

x.  LPG filling point shall by fully protected from vehicle impact by suitable crash barri-

ers and unauthorized access. 

 

4.  FILL LINE 
AND          
FILLING 
POINT 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 901 of 1348 

ITEMS 

5. VALVES 

Table 11.4: Piping Distribution requirements for LPG Central Tank installations 

LPG PIPING DISTRIBUTION, FILLING AND OTHER REQUIREMENTS FOR 
LPG CENTRAL TANK INSTALLATIONS 

i.  All valves and controls shall be easily accessible and have sufficient space for 

maintenance. 

ii.  All liquid and vapor withdrawal openings that are 3.2 cm or larger shall be 

equipped with internal valves. 

iii. The internal valves shall remain closed except during periods of operations.  
iv. Internal valves shall be equipped with remote closure and automatic shutoff 

through thermal activation. 

v.  A positive manual shutoff valve shall be installed as close as practical to each inter-

nal valve.  

vi. All liquid and vapor inlet openings shall be equipped with a backflow check valve 
where applicable installed with a positive manual shut off valve installed as close 
as practical to the backflow check valve. 

vii. Insulation of container shall be able to limit the container to not over 427 degree 

Celsius for a minimum period of 50 minutes.  

6. ELECTRICAL 

i.  Electrical equipment and wiring shall be approved for the purpose and shall com-

EQUIPMENT 
AND WIRING 

ply with NFPA 70. 

ii.  Wiring for LPG leak detection system, supervision and remote operations shall be 
MICC or 2 hour fire rated 3(4)x1.5 mm cable and earthing could also apply in addi-
tion depending on the Gas Detection Control Panel cable. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 902 of 1348 

 

Table 11.4: Piping Distribution requirements for LPG Central Tank installations 

ITEMS 

LPG PIPING DISTRIBUTION, FILLING AND OTHER REQUIREMENTS 
FOR LPG CENTRAL TANK INSTALLATIONS 

7.  LPG  LEAK    
DETECTION 
AND ALARM 
SYSTEM 

i.   In order to avoid central deactivation of the gas supply for every kitchen two 

stages of gas detection system – stage 1 (central Gas Detection System for the 
building) and stage 2 (local apartment Kitchen Gas Detection System) shall be 
provided. 

 
 STAGE 1: CENTRAL BUILDING GAS DETECTION SYSTEM 
 
i.  LPG leak detectors shall be approved and listed. (See section 6). 
ii.  Installation of LPG detectors shall be as per manufacturer’s guideline. 
iii. Gas detection system shall be interfaced with a local alarm connected to a main 

fire alarm panel.  

iv.  The LPG leak detection control panel shall have modular design for extension of 

input/output modules. 

v.  LPG leak detection system control panels shall have “low alarm” at 15% LEL and 

“high alarm” at 30 % LEL. (Lower Explosive Limit). 

vi. Main LPG supply shall shut-off automatically with 30% LEL. 
vii. LPG leak detection control panel shall have zone wise indication of LEL concen-

trations, with zone selection features. 

viii.The remote emergency shut-off Switch shall be at least 3 m away from the LPG 

Tank and near the exit stair. It shall be clearly marked and placed at a suitable 
height for easy access during emergencies. 

ix.  LPG leak detection control panels shall have minimum of following features..                                               

a. Manual Deluge System activation and indication.                                                                                                       
b. LPG Gas pressure status                                                                                                         
c. Solenoid valve operation status indication                                                                                                                          
d. Fire Alarm indication                                                                                                                       
e. LPG leak, High indication                                                                                                                         
f.  LPG percentage in Tank indication                                                                                                
g. Manual shut-off of LPG supply from LPG Tank.                                                            
x.  Sounder with flasher having different alarm tone distinguishable from Fire alarm 

shall be provided for the facility and it shall be clearly audible.       

 
STAGE 2: APARTMENT/RETAIL UNIT KICTHEN GAS DETECTION SYSTEM 
  
i. Kitchen type LPG detectors shall be approved by Civil Defence. See Section 6. 
ii. LPG leak detectors, Standalone, Kitchen type, shall be installed for Kitchens, LPG 

consuming appliances, as per manufacturer’s instructions. 

iii. LPG-leak detector shall be provided, not more than 30 cm from finished floor 

level and 1.5 m from the cooking and other LPG consuming appliance.  

iv. The remote emergency shut-off Switch shall be at least 1.5 m away from the ap-

pliances and at the kitchen exit door(s). It shall be clearly marked and placed at a 
suitable height for easy access during emergencies. 

v. Emergency Shut-off solenoid valve shall be located in the local PRDP and shall be 

directly controlled by gas detector.  

vi. Please refer to Figure 11.4.   

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 903 of 1348 

Table 11.4: Piping Distribution requirements for LPG Central Tank installations 

ITEMS 

LPG PIPING DISTRIBUTION, FILLING AND OTHER REQUIREMENTS 
FOR LPG CENTRAL TANK INSTALLATIONS 

8. ILLUMINATION  i.  Adequate lighting shall be provided for LPG tank and filling connections to enable 

night time maintenance and refilling operations. 

ii.  Lighting and installation shall be in accordance with relevant requirements of 

NFPA 70. 

9. FIRE ACCESS 

i.  Clear and Safe access, free from vegetation,  shall be provided to and around LPG 

tanks for fire fighting operations during emergencies. 

10. FENCING 

i.  An industrial type, chain-link fencing of 1.8 m height shall be provided  around 

the LPG tank installations. Such fencing shall have minimum of 2 exit gates of        
1.2 m width available where LPG tanks are filled within the fenced enclosure. 

ii.  Above ground tanks located near parking lots, vehicle ramps and roads, shall be 
provided with steel barricades along with fences to safeguard tanks from vehicu-
lar accidental collisions. 

iii. Where above ground tanks are located in areas having towers nearby or facing 

highrise building balconies shall be protected with mesh covers on top along with 
fences, to safeguard tanks from flying debris, falling ignition sources and flaming 
debris. 

11. WARNING 

i.  A warning sign or notice of minimum size of 800mm x 600 mm shall be perma-

SIGNS 

nently and legibly displayed at the front of the installation. In Arabic and English 
conveying, "LPG / HIGHLY FLAMMABLE / NO SMOKING / NO NAKED LIGHTS" 

 

Figure 11.6.: Standard LPG Warning Sign 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 904 of 1348 

2.5.3.  Above ground LPG Tank installation  
 

2.5.3.1. 

 Aboveground LPG Tank installation shall comply with requirements of   
Section 2.5.1., 2.5.2., 2.5.3. and Section 6. 

 

Table 11.5: Aboveground LPG Tank Installation Guideline 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS FOR  
ABOVE GROUND LPG TANK INSTALLATIONS 

1. LOCATION OF ABOVE-

i.  Aboveground LPG Tanks shall be installed on ground, outdoor, open to 

GROUND TANKS 

sky at grade level. 

ii.  Location of the tank shall be such that it is not prone to water flooding, 

either from rain or from accidental water main leakages. 

iii. Tanks located on elevation and podium are considered as Roof mount-

ed Tanks and shall comply with Section 2.5.4. 

iv. LPG Tanks shall not be located within 3 m of dike wall of other flamma-

ble and combustible liquids. 

2.  INSTALLATION OF 

i.  Aboveground Tanks shall be placed on concrete, masonry or other non-

ABOVEGROUND TANKS 

combustible structural supports located on concrete or masonry foun-
dations with the container supports. 

ii.  Such foundations and supports shall withstand loaded Tank weights, 

wind loads and seismic loads. 

iii.  Where saddles are used to support the container, they shall allow for 
expansion and contraction and prevent an excessive concentration of 
stresses. 

iv. Containers shall be installed on a level surface with bottom of the Tank 

not more than 300 mm above concrete foundation surface. 

v.  The container shall be secured to the building structure. 
vi.  Saddles or foundations or masonry and supports shall be coated or pro-

tected to minimize corrosion. 

vii. LPG Tanks shall not be stacked one over the other in any arrangements. 

 

Figure 11.7.: Aboveground LPG Tank installation 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 905 of 1348 

Table 11.5: Aboveground LPG Tank Installation Guideline 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

3. QUANTITY    

ALLOWED 
FOR ABOVE-
GROUND 
TANKS 

i.  Maximum allowed quantity for above ground LPG Tanks is 72,000 Gal. tank in one 
location. Such quantity can be either in one tank or aggregate of multiple LPG tank 
capacities. 

ii.  More than 72,000 Gal. capacity of LPG containers shall be subdivided into groups 

of LPG tank or tanks, not exceeding 72,000 Gal. capacities and such groups shall be 
15 m apart from each other. 

4. SEPARATION 

DISTANCES 
FOR ABOVE 
GROUND 
LPG TANKS 

i.  Above ground LPG Tank separation shall be as per Table 11.6.a. 
ii.  Industrial Above ground LPG Tank separation distances shall be as per                        

Table 11.6.b. The Fire walls if provided shall be of 1 hour fire rated and shall be 
constructed around LPG Tanks with a minimum height of 2 m. 

iii. Above ground LPG Tanks shall be separated from Flammable liquids containers as 

per Table 11.6.c. 

iv. Above ground LPG Tanks shall be separated from Liquid Oxygen containers as per 

Table 11.6.d. 

v.  The tank separation distances mentioned in Table 11.6.a., 11.6.b., 11.6.c. and 
11.6.d. shall be from above ground LPG tank surface to any point of structure, 
building, compound wall, Public road, other equipment, exit roads, fire truck   ac-
cessway,  assembly points, parking lot, drains, shaft openings, pits, opening to 
basements, ramp openings. 

vi. 6 m distance shall be maintained from tank surface to any Air intake units, Window 

type and Split Type AC units, Air vents, Balanced type flue outlets. 

vii. 10 m distance shall be maintained from tanks to Fire Hydrant, fire fighting equip-

ment, fire fighting valves, fire command centers. 

viii. An above ground LPG tank and any of its parts shall not be located within 1.8 m of 

a vertical plane beneath overhead electric power lines that are over 600 volts. 
ix.  There shall be no vegetation, dry grass and combustible material within     3 m 

around the surface where above ground tank is located. 

x.  Where Fire walls are accepted by Civil Defence, Fire walls should be provided only 

on one side and not be provided on more than two sides. In all cases the natural 
ventilation should not be significantly impaired. Where two fire walls are being 
considered the Civil Defence shall be consulted. 

5.  FIRE            

PROTEC-
TION FOR 
ABOVE 
GROUND 
TANKS 

i.  Above ground LPG tank shall be provided with fixed water spray system. The fire 

pump and water tank shall be from the building that the LPG tank is serving. Water 
spray system design and installation shall comply with Chapter 9. 

ii.  Where fire pump and fire water tank is not available in the building that the LPG 

tank is serving, Dry type water spray ring with open nozzles, connected to Civil De-
fence breeching inlet, shall be provided. Such system design and installation shall 
comply with Chapter 9. 

 

Figure 11.8..: Water spray for Aboveground LPG Tank 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 906 of 1348 

Table 11.6.a: Aboveground LPG Tank Separation distances 

AGGREGATE LPG TANK      
CAPACITIES 

SEPARATION  
DISTANCE 

DISTANCE BETWEEN 
LPG TANKS 

1. Up to 500 Gal. 

2. 501 Gal.— 2000 Gal. 

3. 2001 Gal.— 30,000 Gal. 

4. 30,001 Gal.— 70,000 Gal. 

5. 70,001 Gal.— 90,000 Gal. 

6. 90,001 Gal.— 120,000 Gal. 

7. 120,001 Gal.— 200,000 Gal. 

8. 200,001 Gal.— 1000,000 Gal. 

3 m 

7.6 m 

15 m 

23 m 

30 m 

38 m 

61 m 

91 m 

9. More than 1000,000 Gal. 

122 m 

1 m 

1 m 

1.5 m 

1/4 of sum of diameters 

of adjacent LPG  

Containers 

 

 

 

Table 11.6.b.: Industrial Aboveground LPG Tank Separation distances 

AGGREGATE LPG TANK      
CAPACITIES 

SEPARATION  
DISTANCE 

SEPARATION 
DISTANCE 
WITH 1 HOUR 
FIRE WALL 

DISTANCE 
BETWEEN 
LPG TANKS 

1. Up to 500 Gal. 

2. 501 Gal.— 1000 Gal. 

3 m 

3 m 

3. 1001 Gal.— 2,000 Gal. 

7.6 m 

4. 2,001 Gal.— 30,000 Gal. 

4. 30,001 Gal.— 70,000 Gal. 

5. 70,001 Gal.— 90,000 Gal. 

15 m 

23 m 

30 m 

6. 90,001 Gal.— 120,000 Gal. 

38 m 

0.3 m 

1.5 m 

4 m 

7.6 m 

11 m 

15 m 

23 m 

1 m 

1 m 

1 m 

1.5 m 

1/4 of sum  of 

the diameters 

of 2 adjacent 

7. 120,001 Gal.— 200,000 Gal.  61 m 

No reduction 

Tanks 

8. 200,001 Gal.— 1000,000 Gal.  91 m 

No reduction 

9. More than 1000,000 Gal. 

122 m 

No reduction 

 

 

Points to Ponder 

Safest and most economic LPG Tank installation is underground type installation. 

If properly coated and with Cathodic protection, LPG Tanks installed underground 

do not need fire protection systems and required separation distances from struc-

tures and public ways are minimum. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 907 of 1348Table 11.6.c.: Flammable Liquids Tanks and Aboveground LPG Tank Separation distances 

 

FLASH POINTS OF FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS  MINIMUM      

SEPARATION 
FROM LPG 
TANKS OF          
CAPACITY 
UP TO  
30,000 Gal. 

MINIMUM      
SEPARATION 
FROM LPG 
TANKS OF   
CAPACITY 
MORE THAN 
30,000 Gal. 

1. Less than 320C 

2. 320C — 650C   
Less than 3000 Liter (793 Gal) Tanks 

3. 320C — 650C  
More than 3000 Liter (793 Gal) Tanks 

6 m to bund wall 

15 m to bund wall 

3 m to bund wall 

6 m to bund wall 

3 m to bund wall 
and 6 m to tank 

15 m to bund wall 

Table 11.6.d.: Liquid Oxygen Tanks and Aboveground LPG Tank Separation distances 

LPG TANK  CAPACITY 

MINIMUM SEPARATION         
DISTANCE OF LIQUID 
OXYGEN TANK OF 
LESS THAN 125,000 LI-
TER (33,000 GAL)  
CAPACITY 

MINIMUM SEPARATION         
DISTANCE OF LIQUID 
OXYGEN TANK OF 
MORE THAN 125,000 
LITER (33,000 GAL)  
CAPACITY 

1. Up to 500 Gal. 

2. 501 Gal.— 1000 Gal. 

3. 1001 Gal.— 2,000 Gal. 

4. 2,001 Gal.— 30,000 Gal. 

5. 30,001 Gal.— 70,000 Gal. 

6 m 

7.6 m 

7.6 m 

15 m 

23 m 

30 m 

45 m 

Risk Assessment is required 

Risk Assessment is required 

Risk Assessment is required 

6. More than 70,000 Gal. 

Risk Assessment is required  Risk Assessment is required 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 908 of 1348 

2.5.4.  On Roof LPG Tank installation  
 

2.5.4.1. 

 On roof, on podium, on elevated platform LPG Tank installation shall com-
ply with requirements of   Section 2.5.1., 2.5.2., 2.5.4. and section 6. 

Table 11.7.: On roof LPG Tank Installation Guideline 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS FOR  
ON ROOF LPG TANK INSTALLATIONS 

1.  LOCATION OF 

i.  LPG Tanks or cylinders are not allowed to be installed on the roof of build-

ROOF TOP TANKS 

ings. However, considering the UAE’s building and space trend, it is per-
mitted on roof subjected to strict compliance with Code and regulation re-
quirements . 

ii.  Tanks located on elevation and podium are considered as Roof mounted 

Tanks and shall comply with this Section, 2.5.4. 

iii. Roof top LPG Tanks are not allowed to be installed on building roofs with 

Helipad on the same roof. 

iv. The location of the LPG tank shall permit access to all valves and controls 

and shall have enough surrounding area to permit the required mainte-
nance 

v.  Level of roof top LPG tank location shall be such that minimum of one build-
ing standard fire exit stair shall reach that level. Cat ladders, alternate stairs 
and temporary stairs are not allowed to be installed to access the roof top 
LPG tank installations. 

vi. LPG tanks shall not be installed on stair core roof, lift machine room roof 

and upper roof levels without building standard stair access. 

vii. LPG Tanks shall be installed where there is free air movement. 
viii.Where tanks are covered because of aesthetic reasons, such enclosure shall 
be fully ventilated or perforated and shall comply with separation distances 
of Table 11.7. 

ix. LPG Tanks shall not be located within 3 m of dike wall of other flammable 

and combustible liquids. 

2.  INSTALLATION OF 
ON ROOF TANKS 

i.  For roof top LPG tank installations, the building shall be of Type I, 443 or 

332, or Type II, 222, construction as specified in Chapter 1.  

ii.  The support of the tank shall be designed to the same seismic criteria as the 

building. 

iii. The roof which the tank is located shall be able to support the weight of the 

container filled with water. 

iv. Tank shall be installed on a level surface. 
v.  The Tank shall be secured to the building structure. 

3.  QUANTITY           

i.  Maximum allowed roof top LPG tank quantity for buildings complying with 

ALLOWED FOR 
ROOF TOP TANKS 

Table 11.7.2.i., is 2000 Gal. (Aggregate)  

ii.  For other types of construction, not complying to Table 11.6, 2, i., the total 

allowable quantity for roof top LPG Tank shall be reduced to 1000 gal. 
(Aggregate)  

iii. For Malls, developments larger than 20,000 m2  with central LPG tanks, 

quantity allowed on roof top installations shall be permitted to be 4000 Gal 
in two 2000 Gal LPG Tanks installed 15 m apart. Such approvals, however, 
shall be based on Civil Defence assessment of project and evaluation of the 
proposal. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 909 of 1348 

ITEMS 

Table 11.7.: On roof LPG Tank Installation Guideline 

REQUIREMENTS FOR  
ON ROOF LPG TANK INSTALLATIONS 

DISTANCES FOR 
ROOF TOP LPG 
TANKS 

4.  SEPARATION                   

i.  On roof LPG Tank separation shall be as per Table 11.8. and Figure 11.10.  
ii.  Where tanks of multiple capacities are installed in group, distance between 

such tanks shall be as applicable to the largest capacity tank. 

iii. The tank separation distances mentioned in Table 11.8. shall be measured 

from LPG tank surface to any point of structure, building, parapet wall, com-
pound wall, other equipment, exit stairs, fire truck accessway,  assembly 
points, parking lot, drains, shaft openings, pits, opening to basements, ramp 
openings. 

iv. 6 m distance shall be maintained from tank surface to any Air intake units, 
Window type and Split Type AC units, Air vents, Balanced type flue outlets. 
v.  10 m distance shall be maintained from tanks to Fire Hydrant, fire fighting 

equipment, fire fighting valves, fire command centers. 

vi.  On roof LPG tank and any of its parts shall not be located within 1.8 m of a 

vertical plane beneath overhead electric power lines that are over 600 volts. 
vii. There shall be no vegetation, dry grass and combustible material within 3 m 

around the surface where above ground tank is located. 

5.  FIRE PROTECTION 

FOR ROOF TOP 
TANKS 

i.  Roof top LPG tank shall be provided with fixed water spray system. The fire 
pump and water tank shall be from the building that the LPG tank is serving. 
Water spray system design and installation shall comply with Chapter 9. 

ii.  Where fire pump and fire water tank is not available in the building that the 

LPG tank is serving, Dry type water spray ring with open nozzles, connected to 
Civil Defence breeching inlet, shall be provided. Such system design and in-
stallation shall comply with Chapter 9. 

 

Table 11.8: Roof top LPG Tank Separation distances 

AGGREGATE LPG TANK      
CAPACITIES 

SEPARATION  
DISTANCE 

DISTANCE BETWEEN 
LPG TANKS 

1. Up to 500 Gal. 

2. 501 Gal.— up to 1000 Gal. 

3. 1001 Gal.— Up to 2000 Gal. 

4. More than 2000 Gal. 

3 m 

4.5 m 

7.6 m 

7.6 m 

1 m (See Figure  11.10.) 

1 m (See Figure  11.10.) 

1 m (See Figure  11.10.) 

15 m 

 

BREEACHING INLET FOR LPG TANK 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 910 of 1348 

Figure 11.9.: Roof top LPG Tank installation with Water spray protection 

Points to Ponder 

Building trend in UAE is such that whole plot area is utilized for building or base-

ment space, making it difficult for designers to allocate fully compliant space for 

LPG Tank installations. Inevitably, LPG tanks end up on highrise building roofs 

and on podiums which is not allowed by many codes and practices internationally. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 911 of 1348 

 

 

Figure 11.10.: Roof top LPG Tank acceptable arrangements 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 912 of 1348 

 

 

Figure 11.10.: Roof top LPG Tank acceptable arrangements 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 913 of 1348 

 

 

Figure 11.10.: Roof top LPG Tank acceptable arrangements 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 914 of 1348 

2.5.5.  Underground or Mounded LPG Tank installation  
 

2.5.5.1. 

 Underground or Mounded LPG Tank installation shall comply with require-
ments of   Section 2.5.1., 2.5.2., 2.5.5. and section 6. 

Table 11.9: Underground or Mounded LPG Tank Installation Guideline 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS FOR  
UNDERGROUND OR MOUNDED LPG TANK INSTALLATIONS 

1.  LOCATION 
OF UNDER-
GROUND OR 
MOUNDED 
TANKS 

2.  INSTALLA-
TION OF   
UNDER-
GROUND OR 
MOUNDED 
TANKS 

i.  Underground or Mounded LPG Tanks shall be installed below ground, outdoor 

with relief valves open to sky at grade level. 

ii.  Buildings, sheds and canopies shall not be constructed over any underground or 

mounded LPG tanks. 

iii. Partially buried or unmounded LPG tank installation shall be considered as Above 

ground installation and shall comply with Section 2.5.3. 

iv. Location of the tank shall be such that it is not prone to water flooding, either 

from rain or from accidental water main leakages. 

v.  LPG Tanks shall be installed where there is free air movement. 
vi. Underground or Mounded LPG tanks installed in areas with no vehicle traffic shall 

be installed at least 15 cm below grade. 

vii. Underground or Mounded LPG tanks installed in areas with vehicle traffic within 3 

m shall be installed at least 46 cm below grade or shall be provided with barri-
cades around the entire tank and connections to prevent vehicular damages and 
accidents. 

viii.Approved and listed interchangeable aboveground and underground LPG tank 

assemblies  shall not be placed with  underground tank shell more than 3 m below 
grade (ground). 

ix. Where tanks are covered because of aesthetic reasons, such enclosure shall be 
fully ventilated or perforated and shall comply with separation distances of    Ta-
ble 11.9. 

x.  LPG Tanks shall not be located within 3 m of dike wall of other flammable and 

combustible liquids. 

i.  Underground or mounded LPG tanks shall be approved and listed for under-

ground or mound installation with labels and marking confirmation. 

ii.  Underground installations shall be executed by Civil Defence approved contrac-

tor. 

iii.  Cathodic protection shall be provided for the underground and mounded LPG 

tanks to prevent corrosion. 

iv.  Tanks shall be coated fully without any pinhole in the coating to prevent under-

ground or mounded tanks from corrosion.  

v.  Concrete bed shall be provided as foundation in al cases  and designed to over-

come buoyant forces in case of water flooding . The UG tanks must be fixed/
strapped to this foundation. 

vi.  All underground tanks must be strapped or fixed to a solid foundation designed 
to prevent floatation in case of submergence of the tank due to water flooding 
for any reasons. 

vii.  An underground LPG tank shall not be acceptable as underground installation 

without backfilling the pit. 

viii. Backfill shall be free of rocks and abrasives so that coating is not compromised. 
ix.  The discharge of the regulator vent shall be above the highest probable water 

level to prevent the tank relief valve from blockages. 

x.  Before backfilling, any damage to LPG tanks shall be inspected and repaired. 
xi.  Containers shall be set level and shall be surrounded by earth or sand firmly 

 

tamped in place. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 915 of 1348 

ITEMS 

Table 11.9.: Underground or Mounded LPG Tank Installation Guideline 

REQUIREMENTS FOR  
UNDERGROUND OR MOUNDED LPG TANK INSTALLATIONS 

2.  INSTALLATION OF    

UNDERGROUND 
OR MOUNDED 
TANKS 

xi.  Mounded LPG tanks (See definition, 1.12.) shall be installed above grade 
and covered with earth, sand, vermiculite or perlite with wall around or 
any other method to hold these filling materials. 

xii.  Such filling materials shall cover the Tank with thickness of at least 30 cm. 
xiii. A protective cover shall be provided on top of mounding materials to safe-

guard against corrosion. 

xiv. Mounded LPG tank bottom valves and appurtenances shall be accessible 

for operation or repair, without disturbing mounding material by providing 
an opening or tunnel of width 1.2 m in diameter.  

xv.  Alternatively, to access the mounded tank valves and appurtenances, these 

bottom connections shall be extended beyond the mound to exterior as 
per ASME code and design. 

Xvi. Gas detector explosion proof type shall be installed in close proximity to 

every underground or mounded tank.  

 

Figure 11.11.: Underground LPG Tank Installation 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 916 of 1348 

ITEMS 

3.  QUANTITY ALLOWED 
FOR UNDERGROUND 
OR MOUNDED 
TANKS 

4.  SEPARATION                 
DISTANCES FOR            
UNDERGROUND OR 
MOUNDED TANKS 

Table 11.9: Underground or Mounded LPG Tank Installation Guideline 

REQUIREMENTS FOR  
UNDERGROUND OR MOUNDED LPG TANK INSTALLATIONS 

i.  Maximum allowed quantity for underground or mounded LPG Tanks is 

180,000 Gal. tank in one location. Such quantity can be either in one tank 
or aggregate of multiple LPG tank capacities. 

ii.  More than 180,000 Gal. capacity of LPG containers shall be subdivided 
into groups of LPG tank or tanks, not exceeding 180,000 Gal. capacities 
and such groups shall be 15 m apart from each other. 

i.  Under ground LPG Tank separation shall be as per Table 11.10.a. 
ii.  The tank separation distances mentioned in Table 11.10.a. shall be meas-

ured from underground or mounded LPG tank pressure relief valve and 
filling connections to any point of structure, building, compound wall, 
Public road, other equipment, exit roads, fire truck accessway,  assembly 
points, parking lot, drains, shaft openings, pits, opening to basements, 
ramp openings. 

iii. 6 m distance shall be maintained from tank pressure relief valve to any Air 

intake units, Window type and Split Type AC units, Air vents, Balanced 
type flue outlets. 

iv. 10 m distance shall be maintained from tank pressure relief valve to Fire 
Hydrant, fire fighting equipment, fire fighting valves, fire command cen-
ters. 

v.  Underground or mounded LPG tank pressure relief valve and any of its 
parts shall not be located within 1.8 m of a vertical plane beneath over-
head electric power lines that are over 600 volts. 

vi.  There shall be no dry grass and combustible material within 3 m around 
the surface where underground or mounded tank is located. However, 
landscaping with greenery is acceptable when appropriate coating to 
tanks and method is ensured to restrict irrigation water from seeping on-
to tank surfaces, causing corrosion. 

5.  FIRE PROTECTION 

i.  None. Fire protection for underground or mounded LPG Tanks is not man-

FOR UNDERGROUND 
OR MOUNDED 
TANKS 

datory. If hazards exist next to underground or mounded LPG Tanks and 
risk assessment demands, cooling options can be considered. 

 

MOUNDED LPG TANKS FOR ILLUSTRATION 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 917 of 1348 

 

 

Figure 11.12.: Mounded LPG Tank Installation 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 918 of 1348 

Table 11.10.a.: Underground or Mounded LPG Tank LPG Tank Separation distances 

AGGREGATE LPG TANK      
CAPACITIES 

SEPARATION  
DISTANCE 

DISTANCE BETWEEN 
LPG TANKS 

1. Up to 500 Gal. 

2. 501 Gal.— Up to 2000 Gal. 

3 m 

3 m 

0 m 

1 m 

3.a. 2001 Gal.— Up to 30,000 Gal. 

15 m 

1.5 m 

ASME Tanks installed in full        
compliance to Table 11.10.b. 
 
3.b. Up to 30,000 Gal.  
        

ASME TANKS 
 
1.5 m 

ASME TANKS 
 
3 m, if all        
requirements of 
Table 11.10.b. 
are complied 
with 

4. More than 30,000 Gal. 

15 m 

1/4 of sum of diameters 
of adjacent LPG Tanks 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Table 11.10.b.: Reduction of Underground or Mounded ASME LPG Tank Separation Distances 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS FOR REDUCTION OF SEPARATION              
DISTANCES FOR UNDERGROUND OR MOUNDED ASME LPG 
TANK INSTALLATIONS 

1.  MEASUREMENT OF    

i.  Tank separation distance shall be measured from Tank surface, not relief 

SEPARATION                    
DISTANCE 

valve. 

2.  TANK APPURTE-

i.  Tank shall be ASME containers, manufactured, tested and certified as 

NANCES FOR UNDER-
GROUND OR MOUND-
ED TANKS 

per ASME. 

ii.  All liquid withdrawal openings and vapour withdrawal openings that are 

1.25 inch (3.2 cm) or larger shall be equipped with internal valve. 

iii. Internal valves shall remain closed except during periods of operations. 

3.  REMOTE SHUTDOWN   

i.  Internal valves shall be equipped for remote closure and automatic 

FACILITIES 

shutoff through thermal (fire) actuation. 

ii.  A positive manual shutoff valve shall be installed as close as practical to 

each internal valve.  

iii. All liquid and vapor inlet openings shall be equipped with a backflow 

check valve that is designed for the intended application and a positive 
manual shutoff valve installed as close as practical to the backflow check 
valve. 

iv. Automatic system shutdown of all power supply for transfer equipment 
and primary valves (internal valves and emergency shutoff valves) shall 
be provided through thermal (fire) actuation and in the event of a hose 
pull-away.  

v.  Remote shutdown station shall be installed within 4.6 m of point of 

transfer.  And additional remote shutdown station shall be installed from 
7.6 m to 30 m from the transfer point. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 919 of 1348 

 
 
 
 
 

Table 11.10.b.: Reduction of Underground or Mounded ASME LPG Tank Separation Distances 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS FOR  
REDUCTION OF SEPARATION DISTANCES FOR ASME 
UNDERGROUND OR MOUNDED LPG TANK INSTALLATIONS 

4.  LOW EMISSION 

i. 

TRANSFER 

ii. 

The delivery valve and nozzle combination shall mate with the filler valve in 
the receiving container in such a manner that, when they are uncoupled fol-
lowing a transfer of product, not more than 4 cc (0.24 in.3) of product (liquid 
equivalent) is released to the atmosphere. 
Fixed maximum liquid level gauges shall not be used to determine the maxi-
mum permitted filling limit at a low emission transfer site. 

iii.  The maximum permitted filling limit shall be determined by an overfilling 

prevention device or other approved means. 

iv.  Where fixed maximum liquid level gauges are installed, a label shall be 

placed near the gauge providing the following instructions: “Do not use this 
fixed maximum liquid level gauge at low emission transfer stations.” 

v.  Where transfer is made through a hose of nominal 1-in. (2.5-cm) size or 

smaller, the delivery valve and nozzle combination shall not contain an inter-
stitial volume greater than 4 cc (0.24 in.3).  

vi.  Where transfer is made through hose larger than 1 in. (2.5 cm) nominal size, 
no more than 15 cc (0.91 in.3) of LP-Gas (liquid equivalent) shall be released 
to the atmosphere than 15 cc (0.91 in.3) of LP-Gas (liquid equivalent) shall be 
released to the atmosphere during the transfer operation including the un-
coupling of the transfer hose. 

vii.  Fixed maximum liquid level gauges on low emission transfer systems shall be 

installed and used to verify the (function) accuracy of liquid level gauges or 
other liquid level gauging devices. 

viii.  Fixed maximum liquid level gauges shall not be used in the routine filling of 

low emission transfer systems. 

ix.  The use of a float gauge or other approved non-venting device for containers 
of 2001 Gal. or larger water capacity shall be the only means for determining 
the maximum filling limit. 
The maximum filling limit for containers of less than 2001 Gal. water capacity 
in low emission transfer systems shall be controlled through the use of an 
overfilling prevention device or other device approved for this service. 

x. 

 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 920 of 1348 

2.5.6.  PRDP (Pressure Reducing Distribution Panel) Connections and tapping  
 

2.5.6.1. 

 LPG installations from PRDP onwards shall comply  with Table 11.11. and 
section 6. 

 

Table 11.11: PRDP Tapping requirements 

ITEMS 

PRDP TAPPING REQUIREMENTS 

1. PIPING 

i.  No liquid phase LPG is allowed to be piped into the building. 
ii.  Two Stage pressure regulators are essential for all LPG installations. First regulator 

to reduce system pressure to 5 psi (0.350 bar) for large commercial customers or 
to 75 mbar for residential customers and second stage regulator to reduce it fur-
ther to 0.5 psi (0.035 bar).  

iii. LPG distribution shall not pass through the following areas.                                               

a. Exit routes,  Exit stairs , Exit corridors,  Exit lobbies                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
b. Public or assembly areas                                                                                                         
c. Public seating areas                                                                                                                            
d. Fire fighting lobbies,  Fire Command Center, Fire pump room, Control Rooms                                           
e. Lift shafts, Fire fighting riser shafts, Sprinkler valve rooms, garbage chutes, cavi-
ty walls, HVAC ducts                                                                                                                          
f.  Under building and equipment foundations                                                                        
g. Compartments or ducts dedicated for electrical switchgear, transformers, gene-
ra tors garbage rooms, refrigeration chambers, cold rooms                                                    
h.  Pipes and vessels containing   flammable, oxidizing,  corrosive and other haz-
ardous liquids and materials.   

iv. Piping can be routed through ceiling of basements or other confined spaces with 

“pipe-in-pipe” arrangement, which shall be naturally ventilated to open air at 
least from one side.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Figure 11.13.: Tapping from PRDP 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 921 of 1348 

 

ITEMS 

2. SHAFTS 

Table 11.11: PRDP Tapping requirements 

PRDP TAPPING REQUIREMENTS 

i.  LPG distribution inside any building shall be through dedicated shafts. 
ii.  LPG shafts for non-highrise buildings shall be 1 hour fire resistance rated 

shafts. 

iii. LPG shafts for highrise buildings shall be 2 hour fire resistance rated shafts. 
iv. Such shafts for LPG either masonry, steel, concrete or tested and approved fire 

rated particle board. 

v.  Any pipe penetration on the walls and shafts shall be suitably fire stopped to 

maintain the fire resistance of the walls.  

vi. Any duct dedicated for gas shall be naturally ventilated to open air. 

3.  PIPE-IN-PIPE  

i.  Pipe-in-Pipe (Containment) piping arrangement shall be provided where LPG 

ARRANGEMENT 

4.  ELECTRICAL 
EQUIPMENT 
AND WIRING 

piping is passing through basements, studio apartments, show kitchens where 
kitchen is open to living or public spaces and confined spaces and shall be nat-
urally ventilated to open air at least from one side. 

ii.  Such Pipe-in-Pipe arrangements shall be with approved CPVC or steel piping 

complete with LPG leak detectors monitored by central LPG Control panel. 

iii. Where LPG piping needs drops from ceiling in the open space of a room, such 

as in school and research laboratories, shall be provided with steel support 
columns and steel pipe-in-pipe arrangement complete with leak detectors 
monitored by central LPG Control panel. 

i.  Electrical equipment and wiring shall be approved for the purpose and shall 

comply with NFPA 70. 

ii.  Wiring for LPG leak detection system, supervision and remote operations shall 
be MICC or 2 hour fire rated 3(4)x1.5 mm cable and earthing could also apply 
in addition depending on the Gas Detection Control Panel cable. 

5.  LPG  LEAK      

DETECTION AND 
ALARM SYSTEM 

STAGE 2: APARTMENT/RETAIL UNIT KITCHEN GAS DETECTION SYSTEM 
 
i.  Kitchen type LPG detectors shall be approved by Civil Defence. See Section 6. 
ii.  LPG leak detectors, Standalone, Kitchen type, shall be installed for Kitchens, 

LPG consuming appliances, as per manufacturer’s instructions. 

iii. LPG-leak detector shall be provided, not more than 30 cm from finished floor 

level and 1.5 m from the cooking and other LPG consuming appliance.  

iv. The remote emergency shut-off Switch shall be at least 1.5 m away from the 

appliances and at the kitchen exit door(s). It shall be clearly marked and placed 
at a suitable height for easy access during emergencies. 

v.  Emergency Shut-off solenoid valve shall be located in the local PRDP and shall 

be directly controlled by gas detector.  

vi. Please refer to Figure 11.4. 

6.  SAFETY         

i.  Any pipe penetration on the walls shall be suitably fire stopped to maintain the 

PROVISIONS  

fire resistance of the walls. 

ii.  The LPG installation shall be provided with at least one approved portable B:C 

rating dry chemical fire extinguisher having a minimum capacity of 9kg. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 922 of 1348 

3.   LPG Systems used for flame shows in front of audience  

 
3.1.  Intention 
 

3.1.1. 

 

3.2.  General 

  Flame effect shows, both indoors and outdoors, to entertain audiences 
are getting popular in UAE. This section provides minimum requirements 
for safe usage of LPG for flame shows in front of audience. 

3.2.1. 

 
3.2.2. 

 
3.2.3. 

  Flame effect shows either Temporary or permanent (See definitions, 
11.1.37., 11.1.38.), to entertain audiences using LPG shall comply with 
Section 2.5., Table 11.12. and Section 6. 

  No indoor flame effect shows shall be allowed if the building is not fully 
sprinkler protected and provided with automatic fire detection and alarm 
system. 

  No indoor flame effect shows shall be allowed if the room does not com-
ply with occupant load, exit width and minimum of two exit requirements 

                    as per Chapter 3, Means of Egress. 
 
3.2.4. 

  Flame effect control system shall be an approved product. The approval 
and certifications shall be produced to Civil Defence for event approval. 

Table 11.12: Guidelines for LPG Installations used for Flame Effect  

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS FOR FLAME EFFECT USING LPG 

1.  LOCATION OF 

LPG CYLINDERS 
OR                 
CONTAINERS 

2.  QUANTITY OF 

LPG 

i.  Cylinders or Containers shall be located 6 m away from the audience and stage. 
ii.  No piping or valves shall be located within 3 m of the audience.  
iii. No indoor flame effect shows shall be allowed if the building is not fully sprin-

kler protected. 

i.  Maximum of 24 kg LPG, if the Flame effect show is indoors. Where more than 
one cylinder is required for such shows indoors, in the same room, additional 
cylinders shall be separated by each other by 6 m. 

ii.  For outdoor flame effect shows, using central LPG installations or cylinders, 

maximum quantity allowed shall not be more than the quantity required for a 
single day. 

iii. Additional quantity of LPG in cylinders or containers is allowed to be stored sep-

arately in a holding or storage area with risk assessment and emergency re-
sponse procedures, approved by Civil Defence. 

LPG FLAME EFFECT FOR ILLUSTRATION 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 923 of 1348 

 
 Table 11.12: Guidelines for LPG Installations used for Flame Effect  

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS FOR FLAME EFFECT USING LPG 

3.  SEPARATION  
DISTANCES OF 
LPG CYLINDER 
OR CONTAINER 

i.  6 m distance shall be maintained between cylinder compartment to any fire exit 

route, Exit Doors, Exit Stairs, Windows and openings. 

ii.  3 m should be maintained between LPG container and any ignition sources/ ap-

pliances. 

iii. 6 m distance shall be maintained from LPG container to any Air intake units, 
Window type and Split Type AC units, Air vents, Balanced type flue outlets. 

iv. 6 m distance shall be maintained from LPG container to any parking lot, parking 

ramp or road.  

v.  6 m distance shall be maintained between LPG container to Fire Accessways, 

Assembly points and Fire Truck parking slot. 

vi. 3 m distance shall be maintained from cylinders to drains, shaft openings, pits, 

opening to basements, ramp openings. 

vii. 10 m distance shall be maintained from LPG container  compartment to Fire Hy-

drant. 

4.  LPG                

MANAGEMENT 

i.  LPG supply shall only be available for the flame effect during operation. 
ii.  A manual shut-off valve shall be installed in accessible location, when closed 

shall shut-off all LPG supply to flame effect control system. 

iii. Where low pressure in LPG could cause the flam effect control system to mal-

function, low pressure supervision devices shall be installed. 

iv. Where high pressure in LPG could cause the flam effect control system to mal-

function, low pressure supervision devices shall be installed. 

v.  Flame effect valve, ‘hold-open’ type, shall be installed for flame effect burner, 

which when loss of hold-open signal shall shut-off LPG supply to the burner. 
vi. Flame effects using LPG accumulators shall be manufactured, tested and ap-

proved and certified as unfired pressure vessels as per Section 4. The amount of 
LPG in accumulator shall never be more than what is required to produce the 
flame effect. Any amount required more than required for effect, shall be evalu-
ated by risk assessment and approved from Civil Defence. 
vii. The piping used for flame effect shall be pressure tested. 

i.  Electrical equipment and wiring shall be approved for the purpose and shall 

comply with NFPA 70. 

ii.  Wiring for LPG leak detection system, supervision and remote operations shall 

be MICC or 2 hour fire rated 2X1.5 mm cable. 

5.  ELECTRICAL 
EQUIPMENT 
AND WIRING 

6.  SAFETY          
PROVISIONS  

i.  Permanent LPG installations for flame effects shall be provided with fixed Fire 

protection systems as per risk assessment and Civil Defence evaluation. 

ii.  The LPG installation and flame effect area shall be provided with at least two 

approved portable B:C rating dry chemical fire extinguisher having a minimum 
capacity of 9kg and pressurized water extinguishers each. Extinguishers shall be 
placed on opposite sides of flame show area. 

7.  SAFETY          

i.  LPG cylinders or containers shall not be connected or disconnected during the 

PRECAUTIONS 

flame effect show or performance. 

ii.  Flame effects shall not be triggered until all area is declared as hazard free area 

by operation supervisor by either manual means or automatic means. 

iii. All flame effect shows shall be supervised and monitored by fire safety person-

nel knowledgeable and working experience with fire safety and fire fighting. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 924 of 1348 

4.   LP Liquid Transfer operations  

 
4.1.  Intention 
 

4.1.1. 

 

4.2.  General 

 This section of the chapter outlines the minimum requirements of LP liquid 
transfer operations into cylinders , tanks, containers, including into con-
tainers mounted on vehicles. 

4.2.1. 
  
4.2.2. 

 
4.2.3. 

 
4.2.4. 
 
4.2.5. 

 
4.2.6. 

 
4.2.7. 

LPG supply tankers shall be an approved and Civil Defence listed. 

Liquid shall be transferred into containers, including containers mounted 
on vehicles, only outdoors, or in structures specially designed for that pur-
pose. 

The transfer of liquid into containers mounted on vehicles shall not take 
place within a building but shall be permitted to take place under a weath-
er shelter or canopy.  

The transfer hose shall not be routed in or through any building. 

LP-gas tank vehicles shall not be left unattended at any time on Hazardous 
locations, public places, residential area, apartment or hotel complex, edu-
cational facility, hospital or care facility.  

LP-gas tank vehicles intending to park at any one location for longer than 1 
hour shall not be unattended and shall be parked away from public ways, 
highways, public places, hazardous locations.  

The LPG tankers or vehicles with LPG tanks mounted on them during ser-
vice requirements in garage shall not be parked near sources of heat, open 
flames, or similar sources of ignition, or near inadequately ventilated pits. 
Containers mounted on such vehicle shall be leak free and shut-off valve 
shall be closed during vehicle servicing. 

 
4.2.8.  When LPG tankers or vehicles with LPG tanks mounted on them break-

down and can not be parked as per Section 4.2.5. and 4.2.6., the Vehicle 
personnel and the LPG supplying company shall immediately inform Civil 
Defence and Police for assistance and guidance. 

 

4.3.  Operational Personnel  

LP liquid transfer operations shall be carried out by qualified personnel. 
and this shall be the responsibilities of LPG suppliers. Such qualified per-
sonnel shall be trained and experienced in LP liquid transfer operations. 
these personnel shall be provided with refresher training every 3 years and 
shall hold Civil Defence license. 

4.3.1. 

 
 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 925 of 1348 

4.3.2. 

 
4.3.3. 

 

At least one qualified person shall remain in attendance at the transfer 
operation from the time connections are made until the transfer is com-
pleted, shutoff valves are closed, and lines are disconnected. 

Transfer personnel shall exercise precaution to ensure that the LPG trans-
ferred are those for which the transfer system and the containers to be 
filled are designed.  

4.4.  Location of Transfer operations  

4.4.1. 

 
4.4.2. 

 
4.4.3. 

Distance between Point of transfer of liquid LP and surrounding exposures 
shall comply with Table 11.13. 

If LPG is vented to atmosphere, the point of transfer separation distances 
of Table 11.13. shall be doubled. 

If LPG transfer complies with low emission requirements of                             
Table 11.10.b.4., the point of transfer separation distances of                           
Table 11.13. shall be reduced to one-half. 

Table 11.13: Distance between Point of transfer and Exposures  

EXPOSURES AND HAZARDS 

MINIMUM         
HORIZONTAL  
SEPARATION   
DISTANCES 

1.  Buildings, Modular Homes, Recreational vehicles protected with 1 hour fire re-

3 m 

sistance rated walls. (If point of transfer is not inbuilt in the LPG system) 

2.  Buildings, Modular Homes, Recreational vehicles not protected with 1 hour fire 

7.6 m 

resistance rated walls. (If point of transfer is not inbuilt in the LPG system) 

3.  Adjoining property or land. 

7.6 m 

4. Building wall openings,  pits and drains at or below the point of transfer. (If point 

7.6 m 

of transfer is not inbuilt in the LPG system) 

5. Public assembly places, School yards, playgrounds and athletic fields. 

6. Publicways, Streets, and highways from LPG/Fuel dispensing stations. 

7. Publicways, Streets, and highways.  

8. Driveways. 

9. Railroads track centerlines. 

10. Other containers, Tanks and cylinders. 

11. Flammable and class II combustible liquid dispensers and fill connections. 

15 m 

3 m 

7.6 m 

1.5 m 

7.6 m 

3 m 

3 m 

12. Flammable and class II combustible liquid containers, aboveground containers 

6 m 

and underground containers. 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 926 of 1348 

 

4.5.  Operation of Transfer Systems 
 

4.5.1. 

Public access to areas where LPG is stored and transferred shall be prohibited ex-
cept where necessary for the conduct of normal business activities. 

 
4.5.2.  Where liquid level devices are not clearly visible from filling points, two persons 

operation or remote liquid level reading measures shall be ensured. 

 
4.5.3. 

 
4.5.4. 

Sources of ignition shall be turned off during transfer operations, while connec-
tions or disconnections are made, or while LPG is being vented to the atmosphere. 
 Internal combustion engines within 4.6 m of a point of transfer shall be shut down 
while such transfer operations are in progress except for the LPG Tanker. 

Smoking, open flame, portable electrical tools, and extension lights capable of ig-
niting LPG shall not be permitted within 7.6 m of a point of transfer while filling 
operations are in progress. 

 
4.5.5.  Metal cutting, grinding, oxygen–fuel gas cutting, brazing, soldering, or welding shall 
not be permitted within 10.7 m of a point of transfer while filling operations are in 
progress. 

 
4.5.6.  Materials that have been heated above the ignition temperature of LPG shall be 

cooled before that transfer is started. 

 
4.5.7. 

 
4.5.8. 

Sources of ignition shall be turned off during the filling of any LPG container on the 
vehicle. 

Industrial air moving equipment, equipment with open flame within 15 m of point 
of transfer shall be shutdown. 

 
4.5.9.  Hose assemblies shall be observed for leakage or for damage that could impair 
their integrity before each use.  Leaking or damaged hose shall be immediately 
repaired or removed from service. 

 
4.5.10.  Extended fill, offloading, or vapour balance lines, shall terminate with a manual 

shut-off valve and transfer hose half-coupling, immediately upstream of the valve 
by a non-return valve or excess flow valve as appropriate. These should be sited in 
a well-ventilated position. This provision shall be in addition to the requirement for 
valves adjacent to the vessel and hydrostatic relief valves  

 
 

FILLING POINT FOR ILLUSTRATION 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 927 of 1348 

 

 

4.6.  Storage of Spare LPG Containers 
 

4.6.1. 

 

Spare storage of filled LPG Containers with capacity more than 45 kg is not al-
lowed, unless it is in bulk storage yards, LPG distributing facilities or approved by 
Civil Defence upon risk assessment and evaluation. 

4.7.  Bulk LPG Plants, Dispensing Units, Storage and Distribution facilities 
 

4.7.1.  Bulk LPG plants, Dispensing Units, Storage and Distribution facilities shall be evalu-
ated with Fire and Safety risk assessment. Civil Defence approval shall be based on 
such risk assessment reports. 

LPG TRANSFER TRUCK FOR ILLUSTRATION 

LPG FILLING FOR ILLUSTRATION 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 928 of 13484.8.  Parking Requirements for Bulk delivery Trucks 
 

4.8.1.  A clear, dedicated, safe LPG Propane tanker parking area for each bulk installation 

shall be provided close to the delivery point. 

 
4.8.2. 

The dedicated, safe tanker parking area for the LPG/ Propane tankers shall be iden-
tified during the facility planning stage. 

 
4.8.3.  A detailed drawing indicating safe, dedicated tanker parking area to be prepared in 

the project planning stage and approval to be obtained form Civil Defence. 

 
4.8.4. 

 
4.8.5. 

 
4.8.6. 

For cumulative tank capacity up to 15000 liters (3,300 Gal.)  minimum 14 meters in 
length, 4 meters clear wide, safe, dedicated  parking space shall be provided with 
required approach maneuverability and turning radius for the tanker. 

For commutative tank capacity above 15000 liters (3,300 Gal.)  minimum 20 me-
ters in length, 4 meters clear wide, safe, dedicated  parking space shall be provided 
with required approach  maneuverability and turning radius for the tanker. 

The tanker parking area provided in the facility shall be so organized to ensure that 
the tankers can be moved out of the facility swiftly during any emergency in the 
same. 

 
4.8.7.  No LPG installation without dedicated, safe clear parking for the delivery tankers 

shall be permitted. 

 
4.8.8.  No LPG/propane bulk installations permitted with general public parking facility 

unless the same is completely cordoned with suitable valid approvals from Munici-
pality, Police authorities.  If such parking spaces are proposed, the detailed approv-
als from the Police authorities and Municipality to be produced during the project 
planning stage for concurrence to Civil Defence. 

 
4.8.9.  No LPG/Propane installation shall be permitted where in the product delivery op-

eration needs to be done from public roads or crowed public areas. 

 
4.8.10.  Tanker parking area and delivery point shall not be permitted close to areas where 
open flames or other ignition sources like open restaurants, Shesha stalls etc. exist. 

 
4.8.11.  No combustible materials, other fuel storage or fuel handling operations shall be 

permitted within 5 m from the dedicated tanker parking area and the delivery 
point. 

 
4.8.12.  Tanker parking area / delivery points to be provided considering the future devel-

opments of adjacent facilities etc. made for safe bulk tanker unloading. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 929 of 1348 

5.   Inspection and Maintenance of LPG installations  

 
5.1.  General 
 

5.1.1.  All LPG installations shall be inspected and maintained quarterly (Once every 3 

months) by the Civil Defence approved installation and maintenance companies.  

 
5.1.2.  Personnel who perform inspection and maintenance on the LPG systems shall be 

trained in the hazards of the system and in the maintenance and testing procedures 
applicable to the installation and shall hold valid Civil Defence license. 

 
5.1.3.  Written inspection and maintenance manual shall be handed over to the owner 

after installation of LPG systems, which shall address the routine inspection, visual 
inspections and maintenance procedures on corrosion, physical protection, Hoses, 
Piping integrity, fittings, Tanks and Cylinders. 

 
5.1.4.  Such inspection and maintenance manual shall be kept at the facility and shall be 

available for inspection and maintenance contractor. 

 
5.1.5.  Periodic inspection and maintenance reports shall be available for Civil Defence ran-

dom inspections. 

 
5.1.6.  LPG Systems associated Fire Fighting Systems, Fire extinguishers shall be inspected 

and maintained as per relevant chapters of the UAE Fire and Life Safety Code of 
Practice. 

 
5.1.7.  LPG Systems inspection and maintenance shall be in accordance with checklist as 

per Table 11.14. 

 
 

Table 11.14: Inspection and Maintenance Checklist  

INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE GUIDELINE 

i.  LPG storage Tanks shall be of the correct models and constructed exactly in 

accordance with the construction drawings which have been approved by the 
consultant and Civil Defence. 

ii.  Make, Model, Capacity, Certification label and data plate shall be as per speci-

fications and visible. 

iii. No combustibles, vegetation, dry grass and storage shall be accumulated 

around the Tanks. 

iv. Visual examination shall ensure that external surfaces and all welds are free 
from signs of defects such as corrosion, cracking, erosion, deformation etc.  

v.  Inspection and maintenance records shall be followed up. 
vi. Valve thickness shall be checked using ultrasonic thickness meter every 10 

years. 

vii. Tank supports shall be inspected for corrosion, cracks and damages. 

ITEMS 

1.  TANKS 

2.  PRESSURE      RE-

LIEF VALVES 

i.  Pressure relief valves shall be as per design specifications. 
ii.  Shall be replaced every 10 years or if any signs of damage are evident. 
iii. Pressure relief valve shall be open to atmosphere without obstruction. 
iv. Pressure relief vent caps shall be in working condition. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 930 of 1348 

 

Table 11.14: Inspection and Maintenance Checklist  

ITEMS 

INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE GUIDELINE 

3.  SHUT-OFF 

VALVES 

4.  GAUGES 

i.  Shut-off valves shall be as per design specifications. 
ii.  Shall be replaced every 10 years or if any signs of damage are evident. 
iii. Valves shall be accessible freely and shall not be obstructed. 

i.  Gauges shall be as per design specifications. 
ii.  Shall be replaced every 10 years or if any signs of damage are evident. 

5.  PRESSURE          
REGULATING     
DEVICE 

i.  Pressure regulating valves shall be as per design specifications and pressure 

setting. 

ii.  Pressure regulators shall be locked against unauthorized adjustment. 
iii. First stage pressure regulating devices shall be located as close as practicable 

to the storage vessel or vaporizer.  

iv. Isolating valves shall be provided and in correct position at both sides of 

regulator. 

6.  FILLING POINT 

i.  Shall be inspected for tampering, corrosion, cracking, erosion, deformation 

etc. 

ii.  Filling connections shall be located at suitable height and within protective 

enclosure. 

iii. Filling point shall be accessible and shall not be obstructed. 
iv. Identification Signboard/Label shall be in place and visible. 

7.  PIPING AND 

JOINTS 

i.  Visual examination shall ensure that external surfaces and all welds are free 
from signs of defects such as corrosion, cracking, erosion, deformation etc.  

ii.  Signs of LPG leaks, LPG odor shall not be ignored and proper pressure testing 

shall be carried out to ensure no leakages. 

iii. Copper pipe joints shall be brazed properly. 
iv. The gaskets and flanges shall be LPG resistant types and shall be inspected for 

wear and tear. 

v.  Piping supports shall be inspected for corrosion, cracks and damages. 
vi. Pipes penetrating walls and structures shall be appropriately wrapped and 

enclosed in fire rated sleeves and such arrangements shall be ensured to be in 
proper condition. 

vii. Piping labeling and direction indication shall be verified and ensured to be as 

per original design. 

8.  LPG DETECTION 
AND ALARM       
SYSTEM 

i.  LPG control panel shall have uninterrupted power supply. 
ii.  LPG detectors, solenoid valves and emergency switch shall be visually inspect-

ed for blockages, dust and corrosion. 

iii. LPG detector working condition shall be verified with its blinking LED. 
iv. Control Panel LED test shall be carried out to verify normal functioning of all 

indicating LED. 

v.  Inspect and verify the battery and terminals for the control panel for its nor-

mal working condition. 

vi. Inspect, test and verify the supervisory signals controlling other functions. 
vii. Simulate LPG detectors, triggering the alarm and verify the associated alarm, 

automatic switch-off of LPG supply and other control functions. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 931 of 1348 

6.  LPG Systems Material Test Standards and Approval. 

 

6.1.  Acceptable Test Standards and criteria 
 

6.1.1.  All the Materials, Systems, Assemblies, Cylinders, Tanks, Pipes and fittings, equip-

ment, Controls, Devices, Products and Accessories, referred to in this chapter shall 
be Listed, Approved and Registered by the Civil Defence Material Approval Depart-
ment. 

 
6.1.2.  There is no year of edition mentioned against any test standards. It is the intent of 

Civil Defence to convey to the customers seeking laboratory tests and the test la-
boratories to follow the “LATEST EDITION OF THE TEST STANDARD, AS AND WHEN 
THEY ARE UPGRADED/REVISED/AMENDED, TO THE DATE.” 

6.1.3.  LPG Cylinders *Working pressure should not be less than 250 psi (17.57 Kg/Sq. cm) 

and design storage temperature shall be –420C to 550C.+ 
 
i. 

ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code, Section VIII, “Rules for the Construction 
of Unfired Pressure Vessels,” or the API-ASME Code for Unfired Pressure Ves-
sels for Petroleum Liquids and Gases. 
EN 12245, Transportable gas cylinders. Fully wrapped composite cylinders. 

ii. 
iii.  EN 14427, LPG equipment and accessories. Transportable refillable fully 

wrapped composite cylinders for LPG. Design and construction. 

iv.  EN 1442 - LPG equipment and accessories. Transportable refillable welded 

v. 

steel cylinders for LPG. Design and construction.  
EN 12807 - LPG equipment and accessories. Transportable refillable brazed 
steel cylinders for liquefied petroleum gas (LPG). Design and construction. 

vi.  EN 13110 -  LPG equipment and accessories. Transportable refillable welded 
aluminum cylinders for liquefied petroleum gas (LPG). Design and construc-
tion. 

vii.  EN 14140 -  LPG equipment and accessories. Transportable refillable welded 

steel cylinders for LPG.  Alternative design and construction. 

viii.  ISO 4706 - Gas cylinders. Refillable welded steel cylinders. Test pressure 60 bar 

ix. 

x. 

and below.  
ISO 22991 -  Gas cylinders. Transportable refillable welded steel cylinders for   
liquefied petroleum gas (LPG). Design and construction. 
ISO 20703 - Gas cylinders. Refillable welded aluminum-alloy cylinders. Design, 
construction and testing. 

xi.  EN 14893 - LPG equipment and accessories. Transportable Liquefied Petroleum 
Gas (LPG) welded steel pressure drums with a capacity between 150 liters and 
1 000 liters. 
ISO 10460 Gas cylinders -- Welded carbon-steel gas cylinders Periodic inspec-
tion and testing. 

xii. 

xiii.  ISO 11119-2  Gas cylinders of composite construction. Specification and test 
methods. Part 2. Fully wrapped fiber reinforced composite gas cylinders and  
tubes with load-sharing metal liners. 

xiv.  UL 2003 Outline for LP-Gas Cylinder Assemblies.  
xv.  ANSI/UL 147A, Standard For Safety For Nonrefillable (Disposable) Type Fuel 

Gas Cylinder Assemblies.   

xvi.  ANSI/UL 147B Nonrefillable (Disposable) Type Metal Container for Butane. 
xvii.  UAE S/GSO ISO 22991, Gas Cylinders. Transportable refillable welded steel cyl-

inders for   liquefied petroleum gas (LPG). Design and construction. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 932 of 1348xv. 

ISO 11119-3,  Gas cylinders of composite construction. Specification and test 
methods. Part 3. Fully wrapped fiber reinforced composite gas cylinders and 
tubes with non-metallic and non-load-sharing metal liners.  

xvi.  UL 147B, Standard for Nonrefillable (Disposal) Type Metal Container As-

semblies for Butane. 

 

6.1.4.  LPG Cylinder Periodic Inspection 
 

EN 1440, LPG equipment and accessories. Periodic inspection of transportable 
refillable LPG cylinders. 
EN 14912, LPG equipment and accessories - Inspection and maintenance of 
LPG cylinder valves at time of periodic inspection of cylinders. 

i. 

ii. 

 

6.1.5.  LPG Cylinder Checking before and after filling 
 

EN 1439, LPG equipment and accessories. Procedure for checking LPG cylin-
ders before, during and after filling. 

i. 

 

6.1.6.  LPG Container Sealing Caps and Plugs 
 

i. 

EN 16119, Sealing caps and plugs for LPG cylinder and pressure vessel valves.  
Specification and testing. 

 
6.1.7.  LPG Tanks *Working pressure should not be less than 250 psi (17.57 Kg/Sq. cm) 

and design storage temperature shall be –420C to 550C.+ 
 
i. 

Regulations of the U.S Department of Transportation (DOT), the “Rules for the 
Construction of Unfired Pressure Vessels”, Section VIII, Division 1 

ii.  ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code. 
iii.  API-ASME Code for Unfired Pressure Vessels for Petroleum Liquids and Gases. 
iv.  PD 5500  -Specification for unfired fusion welded pressure vessels 
v. 

EN 14075, Static welded steel cylindrical tanks, serially produced for the stor-
age of liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) having a volume not greater than 13 m3 
and for installation underground. Design and manufacture 

vi.  EN 12542, LPG equipment and accessories. Static welded steel cylindrical 

tanks, serially produced for the storage of liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) hav-
ing a volume not greater than 13 m3. Design and manufacture 

vii.  EN 14570, LPG equipment and accessories. Equipping of overground and un-

derground LPG vessels. 

viii.  UL 644, Container assemblies for LP Gas. 
ix.  EN 12493, LPG equipment and accessories.  Welded steel pressure vessels for 

LPG road tankers.  Design and manufacture. 
EN 13445  Unfired Pressure vessel codes 

x. 
 

 6.1.8.  Requalification of (Inspection) LPG Tanks 

 
i. 

ii. 

EN 12817, LPG equipment and accessories.  Inspection and requalification of 
LPG tanks up to and including 13 m3 
EN 12819, LPG equipment and accessories. Inspection and requalification of 
LPG tanks greater than 13 m3 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 933 of 13486.1.9.  Road Tankers 

 
i. 

ii. 

EN 14334, LPG equipment and accessories.  Inspection and testing of LPG road 
tankers. 
EN 12493, LPG equipment and accessories. Welded steel pressure vessels for 
LPG road tankers. Design and manufacture. 

iii.  EN 12805, Automotive LPG components. Containers. 
iv. 
ISO 20826, Automotive LPG components. Containers. 
EN 13776 LPG equipment and accessories. Filling and discharge procedures for 
v. 
LPG road tankers. 

 

6.1.10. Pressure Relief Device 
 

i. 
ii. 

UL 132, Standard on Safety Relief Valves for Anhydrous Ammonia and LP-Gas. 
EN 16631, LPG equipment and accessories.  Pressure relief valves for LPG pres-
sure vessels. Reconditioning requirements. 

iii.  EN 13953, LPG equipment and accessories.  Pressure relief valves for trans-

portable refillable cylinders for Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG). 

iv.  EN 14071, LPG equipment and accessories.  Pressure relief valves for LPG pres-

v. 

sure vessels.  Ancillary equipment. 
EN 14129, LPG Equipment and accessories.  Pressure relief valves for LPG pres-
sure vessels. 

vi.  EN 13175 - LPG Equipment and accessories. Specification and testing for Lique-

fied Petroleum Gas (LPG) pressure vessel valves and fittings. 

 

6.1.11. Pressure Regulators 
 

UL 144, Standard for LP-Gas Regulators. 

i. 
ii.  BS 3016, Specification for pressure regulators for liquefied petroleum gases. 
iii.  EN 12864, Low-pressure, non adjustable regulators having a maximum outlet 

pressure of less than or equal to 200 mbar, with a capacity of less than or 
equal to 4 kg/h, and their associated safety devices for butane, propane or 
their mixtures. 

iv.  EN 16129, Pressure regulators, automatic change-over devices, having a maxi-
mum regulated pressure of 4 bar, with a maximum capacity of 150 kg/h, asso-
ciated safety devices and adaptors for butane, propane, and their mixtures. 
EN 13786, Automatic change-over valves having a maximum outlet pressure of 
up to and including 4 bar with a capacity of up to and including 100 kg/h, and 
their associated safety devices for butane, propane or their mixtures 

v. 

vi.  EN 88-1, Pressure regulators and associated safety devices for gas appliances. 

Pressure regulators for inlet pressures up to and including 50 kPa. 

vii.  EN 88-2, Pressure regulators and associated safety devices for gas appliances. 
Pressure regulators for inlet pressures above 500 mbar up to and including 5 
bar. 

viii.  FM 3510, Flow and Pressure Safety Switches. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 934 of 13486.1.12. Pipes 

 
i.  Wrought iron — ASME B 36.10M, Welded and Seamless Wrought Steel Pipe. 
ii. 
Steel pipe — ASTM A 53, Standard Specification for Pipe, Steel, Black and Hot-
Dipped, Zinc-Coated Welded and Seamless. 

iii.  Steel pipe — ASTM A 106, Standard Specification for Seamless Carbon Steel 

Pipe for High-Temperature Service. 

iv.  Brass pipe — ASTM B 43, Standard Specification for Seamless Red Brass Pipe, 

v. 

Standard Sizes. 
Copper pipe — ASTM B 42, Standard Specification for Seamless Copper Pipe, 
Standard Sizes. 

vi.  Polyamide and polyethylene pipe — ASTM D 2513, Standard Specification for 

Thermoplastic Gas Pressure Pipe, Tubing and Fittings, and shall be recom-
mended by the manufacturer for use with LP-Gas. 

vii.  ASTM 1387, Specification for screwed and socketed steel tubes and tubulars 

and for plain end steel tubes suitable for welding or for screwing to BS 21 pipe 
threads. 

viii.  EN 16125. LPG equipment and accessories. Pipework systems and supports. 

LPG liquid phase and vapour pressure phase. 

ix.  EN ISO 16440. Petroleum and natural gas industries. Pipeline transportation 

x. 

xi. 

xii. 

systems. Design, construction and maintenance of steel cased pipelines. 
EN 682 -  Elastomeric seals. Materials requirements for seals used in pipes and 
fittings carrying gas and hydrocarbon fluids. 
ISO 17484-1 -  Plastics piping systems. Multilayer pipe systems for indoor gas 
installations with a maximum operating pressure up to and including 5 bar 
(500 kPa). Specifications for systems. 
ISO 18225 - Plastics piping systems. Multilayer piping systems for outdoor gas 
installations. Specifications for systems. 

 
6.1.13. Tubing 

 
i. 

Steel tubing — ASTM A 539, Standard Specification for Electric-Resistance-
Welded Coiled Steel Tubing for Gas Fuel Oil Lines. 

ii.  Brass tubing — ASTM B 135, Standard Specification for Seamless Brass Tube 
iii.  Copper tubing (a) Type K or L — ASTM B 88, Specification for Seamless Copper 

Water Tube.  

iv.  Polyamide and polyethylene tubing — ASTM D 2513, Standard Specification 
for Thermoplastic Gas Pressure Pipe, Tubing and Fittings, and shall be recom-
mended by the manufacturer for use with LP-Gas. 
Corrugated stainless steel tubing — ANSI/AGA LC1, Interior Fuel Gas Piping 
Systems Using Corrugated Stainless Steel Tubing. 

v. 

vi.  EN 1057, Copper and copper alloys. Seamless, round copper tubes for water 

and gas in sanitary and heating applications. 

vii.  EN 1254-1, Copper and copper alloys. Plumbing fittings. Fittings with ends for 

capillary soldering or capillary brazing to copper tubes. 

viii.  EN 1254-2, Copper and copper alloys. Plumbing fittings. Fittings with compres-

sion ends for use with copper tubes. 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 935 of 1348ix.  BS 8537, Copper and copper alloys. Plumbing fittings. Specification for press 

x. 

ends of plumbing fittings for use with metallic tubes. 
BS 7838, Specification for corrugated stainless steel semi-rigid pipe and associ-
ated fittings for low-pressure gas pipework of up to DN 50. 

xi.  EN 15266, Stainless steel pliable corrugated tubing kits in buildings for gas with 

an operating pressure up to 0,5 bar. 

xii.  EN 16617:2015 Pipework.  Corrugated metal hose assemblies for combustible 

gas.  Performance requirements, testing and marking. 

 

 6.1.14.  PE Pipes 
 

i. 

ASTM D 2683, Standard Specification for Socket-Type Polyethylene (PE) Fittings 
for Outside Diameter Controlled Polyethylene Pipe. 

ii.  ASTM D 3261, Standard Specification for Butt Heat Fusion Polyethylene (PE) 

Plastic Fittings for Polyethylene (PE) Plastic Pipe and Tubing. 

iii.  ASTM F 1055, Standard Specification for Electrofusion Type Poly-

ethylene Fittings for Outside Diameter Controlled Polyethylene 
Pipe and Tubing. 

iv.  ASTM F 1733, Standard Specification for Butt Heat Fusion Polyamide (PA) Plas-

tic Fitting for Polyamide (PA) Plastic Pipe and Tubing. 

v.  ASTM D2513 -  Standard Specification for Polyethylene (PE) Gas Pressure Pipe, 

vi. 

vii. 

Tubing, and Fittings. 
ISO 4437-3  - Plastics piping systems for the supply of gaseous fuels. Polyeth-
ylene (PE). Fittings. 
ISO 14531-2 - Plastics pipes and fittings. Cross-linked polyethylene (PE-X) pipe 
systems for the conveyance of gaseous fuels. Metric series. Specifications. 
Fittings for heat-fusion jointing. 

viii.  ISO 14531-3   Plastics pipes and fittings. Cross-linked polyethylene (PE-X) pipe 

systems for the conveyance of gaseous fuels. Metric series. Specifications. 
Fittings for mechanical jointing (including PE-X/metal transitions). 

ix.  EN 1555-3 -  Plastics piping systems for the supply of gaseous fuels. Polyeth-

ylene (PE). Fittings. 
EN 13175 - LPG Equipment and accessories. Specification and testing for Lique-
fied Petroleum Gas (LPG) pressure vessel valves and fittings. 

 

x. 

 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 936 of 13486.1.15. PE Fittings 

 
i. 

ii. 

BS ISO 4437-3, Plastics piping systems for the supply of gaseous fuels. Polyeth-
ylene (PE). Fittings. 
EN 1555-3, Plastics piping systems for the supply of gaseous fuels. Polyeth-
ylene (PE). Fittings. 

iii.  GIS/PL2-2, Polyethylene pipes and fittings for natural gas and suitable manu-

factured gas Part 2: Pipes for use at pressures up to 5.5 bar. 

iv.  GIS/PL2-4, Polyethylene pipes and fittings for natural gas and suitable manu-

factured gas Part 4: Fusion fittings with integral heating element(s). 

v.  GIS/PL2-6, Polyethylene pipes and fittings for natural gas and suitable manu-

factured gas Part 6: Spigot end fittings for electrofusion and/or butt fusion pur-
poses. 

vi.  GIS/PL2-8, Polyethylene pipes and fittings for natural gas and suitable manu-

factured gas Part 8: Pipes for use at pressures up to 7 bar. 

vii.  ASTM D 2683, Standard Specification for Socket-Type Polyethylene (PE) 

Fittings for Outside Diameter Controlled Polyethylene Pipe. 

viii.  ASTM D 3261, Standard Specification for Butt Heat Fusion Polyethylene (PE) 

Plastic Fittings for Polyethylene (PE) Plastic Pipe and Tubing. 

ix.  ASTM F 1055, Standard Specification for electrofusion Type Polyethylene 

Fittings for Outside Diameter Controlled Polyethylene Pipe and Tubing. 

x.  ASTM F 1733, Standard Specification for Butt Heat Fusion Polyamide (PA) Plas-

tic Fitting for Polyamide (PA) Plastic Pipe and Tubing. 

 

6.1.16. Flexible Hose /Pigtail 
 

i. 

BS 4089 Specification for metallic hose assemblies for liquid petroleum gases 
and liquefied natural gases. 

ii.  BS  3212  type 1  flexible tubing for applications not exceeding 50 mbar 

working pressure. 

iii.  BS  669  part 1, part 2  for metallic flexible hose. 
iv.  EN 14800 Corrugated safety metal hose assemblies for the connection of do-

   v. 

  vi. 

vii. 

mestic appliances using gaseous fuels. 
ISO 2928 - Rubber hoses and hose assemblies for liquefied petroleum gas, LPG 
(liquid or gaseous phase) and natural gas up to 25 bar (2,5 MPa). Specification. 
ISO 11759 - Rubber hoses and hose assemblies for dispensing liquefied petro-
leum gas (LPG). Specification. 
ISO 8789. Rubber hoses and hose assemblies for liquefied petroleum gas in 
motor vehicles. 

viii.  EN 13766 - Thermoplastic multilayer (non-vulcanized) hoses and hose assem-
blies for the transfer of liquid petroleum gas and liquefied natural gas. Specifi-
cation. 

ix.  EN 1762 - Rubber hoses and hose assemblies for liquefied petroleum gas, LPG 

x. 

(liquid or gaseous phase), and natural gas up to 25 bar (2,5 MPa). Specification. 
ISO 27127 - Thermoplastic multi-layer (non-vulcanized) hoses and hose assem-
blies for the transfer of liquid petroleum gas and liquefied natural gas. 

xi.  UL 21 LP-Gas Hose,   LP-Gas Hose Assemblies. 
xii.  UL 569 Pigtails and Flexible Hose Connectors.  
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 937 of 1348 

 

6.1.17. Valves 
 

FM 7400, Liquid and Gas Safety shut-off valves. 
EN 15069 safety gas connection valves for domestic appliances. 

i. 
ii. 
iii.  EN 161 automatic shut-off valves for gas appliances. 
iv.  EN 14800 corrugated hose for domestic appliances. 
v. 
EN 1106 manually operated taps for gas appliances. 
vi.  EN 331, Manually operated ball valves and closed bottom taper plug valves for 

gas installations for buildings. 

vii.  EN 15069, Safety gas connection valves for metal hose assemblies used for the 

connection of domestic appliances using gaseous fuel. 

viii.  EN 13774, Valves for gas distribution systems with maximum operating pres-

sure less than or equal to 16 bar. Performance requirements. 

ix.  EN 13175, LPG Equipment and accessories. Specification and testing for Lique-

fied Petroleum Gas (LPG) pressure vessel valves and fittings. 
EN 161, Automatic shut-off valves for gas burners and gas appliances. 

x. 
xi.  EN 1983, Industrial valves - Steel ball valves. 
xii.  EN 13547, Industrial valves - Copper alloy ball valves. 
xiii.  EN 13709 Industrial valves - Steel globe and globe stop and check valves 
xiv.  EN 13789 Industrial valves - Cast iron globe valves. 
xv.  UL 132, Standard for Pressure Relief Valves for LPG. 
xvi.  FM 7420, Gas Safety Control Cocks. 
xvii.  FM 7422, Electric Inter cocking fuel gas and fuel oil cocks. 
xviii. ISO 14245, Gas Cylinders.  Specifications and testing of LPG cylinder valves.  

Self-closing. 

xix.  ISO 15995, Gas Cylinders.  Specifications and testing of LPG cylinder valves.  

Manually operated. 

xx.  UL 125 Flow Control Valves, LP-Gas Check valves, Shut-off valves, Hose nozzle 

valves, control manifolds. 

 

 6.1.18.  Gas leak detector 
 

i. 

ii. 

EN 60079-29-1, Explosive atmospheres. Gas detectors. Performance require-
ments of detectors for flammable gases. 
EN 60079-29-4, Explosive atmospheres. Gas detectors. Performance require-
ments of open path detectors for flammable gases. 

iii.  EN 50402, Electrical apparatus for the detection and measurement of combus-

tible or toxic gases or vapour or of oxygen.  Requirements on the functional 
safety of fixed gas detection systems. 

FM 6320, Combustible Gas Detectors. 

iv.  EN 125 flame supervision devices for gas appliances. 
v. 
vi.  UL 1484, Residential Gas Detectors. 
vii.  UL 2075, Standard for Gas and Vapor detectors. 
I Iviii.  IEC 60335-1, Household and similar electrical appliances - Safety - Part 1: Gen-

eral requirements. (Kitchen only). 
IEC 60079-0, Explosive atmospheres - Equipment - General requirements. 
IEC 60079-1, Explosive atmospheres - Equipment protection by flameproof 
enclosures "d"" 
IEC 60079-11, Explosive atmospheres Equipment protection by intrinsic safety 
"i"" 

I Iix. 
I Ix. 

I Ixi. 

 
 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 938 of 13486.1.19. Gas Meters 

 
i. 
ii. 
iii.  UL 25 Meters for Flammable and Combustible Liquids and LP-Gas, LP-Gas Me-

EN 1359,  Diaphragm gas meters 
EN 14236  Ultrasonic domestic gas meters. 

ters 

  

6.1.20. Gas leak Detection Control Panel 
 

i. 

EN 60079-29-1, Explosive atmospheres. Electrical installations design, selection 
and erection. 

 
6.1.21. Vaporizers and Mixers 
 

FM 7151,  LP-Gas Vaporizers, Gas-air mixers and Vaporizer Mixers. 

i. 
ii.  UL 1349 Outline for LP-Gas Vaporizers. 
 

6.1.22. Liquid Level gauging devices 
 

UL 565 Liquid-Level Gauges. 

i. 
 

6.1.23. Overfilling prevention devices 

 
i. 
 

ANSI/UL 2227, Standard for Overfilling Prevention Devices. 

6.1.24. Fire rated Cable, Certified for 120 minutes  

 
i. 

EN 50200, Method of test for resistance to fire of unprotected small cables for 
use in emergency circuits 

ii.    UL  2196, Standard for Fire Test for Circuit Integrity of Fire-Resistive Power, 

Instrumentation, Control, and Data Cables  

iii.    BS 8434-2, Methods of test for assessment of the fire integrity of electric ca-
bles. Test for unprotected small cables for use in emergency circuits. BS EN 
50200 with a 930° flame and with water spray . 

iv.    BS 7629-1, Electric cables. Specification for 300/500 V fire resistant screened 

cables having low emission of smoke and corrosive gases when affected by 
fire. Multicore and multipair cables. 

v.    BS 6387, Test method for resistance to fire of cables required to maintain cir-

cuit integrity under fire conditions. 

vi.    IEC 60331-1, Tests for electric cables under fire conditions. 
vii.    IEC 60331-2, Tests for electric cables under fire conditions. 
viii.   IEC 60332-2-2, Tests on electric and optical fibre cables under fire conditions. 
ix.    IEC 60332-3-10, Tests on electric and optical fibre cables under fire conditions. 
x.      IEC 60331-2, Tests for electric cables under fire conditions. 
xi.     UL 1724, Outline of Investigation for Fire Tests for Electrical Circuit Protective 

Systems. 

xii.    UL 1685, Standard for Vertical-Tray Fire-Propagation and Smoke-Release Test 

for Electrical and Optical-Fiber Cables. 

xiii.   UL 1666, UL 1666 Test for Flame Propagation Height of Electrical and Optical-

Fiber Cables Installed Vertically in Shafts. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 939 of 1348Chapter 12 
FIRE AND LIFE SAFETY DURING 
CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 940 of 1348In this Chapter: 
Î  Responsibilities of Building Owners, Owner’s representative and Main 

Consultants 

Î  Identifying the Risk factors in construction sites 
Î  Implementing  safe  work  practices,  providing  means  of  egress  and 

providing  Fire  Systems  during  construction  phase 

Intent of the Chapter 

• 

• 

Provide  minimum  requirements  to  safeguard  construction,  modification  or 
demolition operations from Fire accidents and ensure safety to life and property. 
To prescribe minimum requirements to maintain safe work practices and safe 
site conditions to prevent fire accidents during constructions, modifications and 
demolition operations. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 941 of 1348 

In this Chapter : 

  Responsibilities of building Owners, 

Owner’s representative and Main 
Consultants 

  Identifying the Risk factors in 

construction sites 

  Implementing safe work practices, 

Intent of the Chapter 

  Provide minimum requirements to safeguard construction, 
modification or demolition operations from Fire accidents 
and ensure safety to life and property. 

  To prescribe minimum requirements to maintain safe 
work practices and safe site conditions to prevent fire 
accidents during constructions, modifications and 
demolition operations. 

providing means of egress and 
providing Fire Systems during 
construction phase 

 

1. Definitions 

1.1.  General 
 

1.1.1.  Shall  

 

 

 

It is a mandatory requirement by Civil Defence 

1.1.2.  Should 

It is a suggested requirement recommended by Civil Defence but not mandatory. 

1.1.3.  Listed 

Approved and registered by individual Emirates’ Civil Defence material department. 

1.1.4.  Means of Egress 

A continuous and unobstructed way of travel from any point in a building or structure 
to a public way consisting of three separate and distinct parts: (1) the exit access, (2) 
the exit, and (3) the exit discharge. 
 

1.1.5.  Means of Escape  

A way out of a building or structure that does not conform to the strict definition of 
means of egress but does provide an alternate way out. 
 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 942 of 1348 

1.2.  During Construction 
 

1.2.1.  Under Construction 

Any building, structure, equipment that is being built or installed or altered or being 
demolished and is not ready to occupy or use, is defined as ‘Under Construction’. 

 
1.2.2.  Temporary 

Duration of six months (180 days). 

 
1.2.3.  Hot Work 

Work involving burning, welding, or a similar operation that is capable of initiating 
fires or explosions. 
 

1.2.4.  Thermal Spraying 

A group of welding or allied processes in which finely divided metallic or nonmetallic 
materials are deposited in a molten or semi molten condition to form a coating. The 
coating material shall be permitted to be in the form of a powder, a ceramic rod, a 
wire, or molten materials. 
 

1.2.5.  Thermal Welding 

A welding process that produces coalescence of metals by heating them with super-
heated liquid metal resulting from a chemical reaction between a metal oxide and 
aluminum, with or without the application of pressure. Filler metal, where used, is 
obtained from the liquid metal.  
 

1.2.6.  Torch –Applied Roofing System 

A bituminous roofing system using membranes that are adhered by heating with a 
torch and melting an asphalt backcoating instead of mopping hot asphalt for adhe-
sion. 
 

1.2.7.  Thermit Welding 

Thermite welding (TW), or exothermic or thermit welding, is a welding that employs 
molten metal to permanently join the conductors.  

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 943 of 1348 

2.  Fire Safety During Construction, Modification,          

Alteration and Demolition  

 

2.1.  Intention 

 

 2.1.1.   Fire Safety requirements in this chapter are to accomplish the following. 

 

2.1.1.1.  Provide minimum requirements and safety guidelines to be followed during 
construction or maintenance, on site, to minimize construction and mainte-
nance related fire accidents which can claim life and property. 

 

2.1.1.2.  To provide minimum prescriptions on safe work practices, safe storage prac-

tices, safe equipment handling and operations procedures to prevent fire 
accidents. 
 

2.1.1.3.  Provide construction sites with minimum 

features to enable workers to achieve 
safe egress and evacuation during fire 
emergencies during construction. 
 

2.2.  General Requirements  

 

2.2.1.  No construction activity shall be assumed small 

scale and low risk. All construction activities shall 
comply to this chapter. 

  
2.2.2.  No modifications, alterations, extensions and 

change of usage to a building or structure shall be 
carried out unless such proposals have been ap-
proved by Civil Defence. 

Did You Know? 

According to NFPA   

survey, Fire fighters   

injured in construction 

site fires are twice as 

likely to be hit or struck 

by debris than fire   

fighters at other site 

fires. 

 
2.2.3.  No under construction buildings or structures shall be occupied in whole or in part un-

less such proposals have been designed, approved, inspected and completion certifi-
cate is obtained as per Civil Defence requirements. 

 
2.2.4. 

It is the owner, owner’s representative and main consultant’s responsibility to comply 
with this chapter by identifying the risk factors and preparing risk management and 
emergency preparedness studies for the construction site from the design stage itself. 

 
2.2.5.  Every worker on site shall be briefed of the requirements of this chapter and shall be 

trained to adhere to fire safety prescriptions of this chapter and usage of fire extin-
guishers as first responders. 

 
2.2.6.  Guidelines of this chapter may not cover all risk factors of the construction activity. It is 

consultant’s responsibility to evaluate risk factors involved in the type of construction 
activity and prepare safety guidelines for such construction operations. 

 
2.2.7.  Guidelines of this chapter have been extracted from NFPA 241, IBC and HSE Docu-

ments. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 944 of 1348 

3.  Application of Fire Safety During Construction, Modi-

fication, Alteration and Demolition  

3.1.  Responsible Entities 
 

3.1.1. 

Implementation of fire safety during construction, modification, alteration and demoli-
tion activities shall be the responsibilities of building owner and main consultant per 
Table 12.1. 

Table 12.1: Responsibilities of Owner and Consultant for Construction Fire Safety 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  BUILDING       

i. 

OWNER’S            

RESPONSIBILITIES 

The owner shall designate a person (Program Manager) who shall be re-
sponsible for the fire prevention program and who shall ensure that it is 
carried out to completion. 

ii.  Building owner shall emphasize the main consultant's role and responsibili-
ties in implementing the guidelines of this chapter and code in his contract 
documents to the consultant. 

iii.  Such contract document between building owner and consultant shall in-

clude a fire safety program to be implemented in all construction, alteration 
or demolition contracts and the right of the owner to administer and en-
force this program, even if the building is entirely under the jurisdiction of 
the contractor.  

2. PROGRAM    

i. 

MANAGER 

ii. 

Program manager shall be responsible to ensure the fire safety plan is pre-
pared by the consultant in accordance with Section 3.2., Section 3.3., Sec-
tion 3.4., and Section 3.5., Section 3.6., Section 3.7., and Section 3.8. of 
this chapter and is implemented on construction site. 
The manager shall be responsible for ensuring that the written fire safety 
plan is distributed to all contractors involved in the construction. 

iii.  The program manager shall ensure that the general contractor’s adequate 

number of individuals are trained in the proper use of portable fire extin-
guishers, which are first aid of fire fighting. 

iv.  The manager shall be responsible for ensuring that proper training in the 

v. 

use of protection equipment has been provided. 
The manager shall be responsible for the presence of adequate numbers 
and types of fire protection devices and appliances and for their proper 
maintenance. 

vi.  The manager shall be responsible for supervising the permit system for hot 

work operations. 

vii.  A weekly self-inspection program shall be implemented, with records main-

tained and made available. 

viii.  Impairments to the fire protection systems or fire alarm, detection, or com-

munications systems shall be authorized only by the fire prevention pro-
gram manager. 

ix.  Temporary protective coverings used on fire protection devices during reno-

vations, such as painting, shall be removed promptly when work has been 
completed in the area. 

x.  Where there is Civil Defence or a private fire brigade, the manager shall be 
responsible for the development of pre-fire plans in conjunction with such 
fire agencies. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 945 of 1348 

 

Table 12.1: Responsibilities of Owner and Consultant for Construction Fire Safety 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

3.  CONSULTANT’S 

RESPONSIBILITY 

1. CONSULTANT’S RESPONSIBILITIES 
 
i. 

v. 

ii. 

iv. 

The Consultant shall be the point of contact to owner and his appointed 
representative, ’The Program Manager’.  
It is consultant’s responsibility to prepare all written fire safety strategies, 
training programs, safety checklists and Fire Systems to be implemented 
during construction, modification, alteration and demolition operations in 
accordance with guidelines of Section 3.2., Section 3.3., Section 3.4., and 
Section 3.5., Section 3.6., Section 3.7., and Section 3.8. of this chapter. 
iii.  A written Fire Protection plan shall be developed for prior to proceeding 
past foundation work for new buildings or commencement of demolition 
work in alteration or modification projects. The written plan shall be con-
sistent with the Fire safety precautions as specified in this chapter and code. 
It is consultant’s responsibility to ensure that the general contractor is im-
plementing and carrying out provisions of the Fire Protection Plan. 
The fire safety plan shall include but not limited to the following.                   
a. Minimizing hazardous and flammable storage in construction site. 
b. Maintaining robust house keeping practices to keep the site free of 
combustibles and flammable rubbish.                                                        
c. Maintaining safe work practices.                                                                  
d. Procedures for Hot work operations, management of hazardous 
materials.                                                                                                          
e. Floor plans identifying the locations of exits, exit stairs, exit routes and 
portable fire extinguishers.                                                                                          
f. Site plans identifying required fire apparatus access roadways and on-site 
fire hydrants.                                                                                                               
g. Site plans identifying the designated exterior assembly areas for each 
evacuation route.                                                                                                         
h. The name and contact phone number of person(s) responsible for compli-
ance with the Fire Protection Plan.                                                                          
i. Procedures for reporting emergencies to the Civil Defence.                              
j. Procedures for emergency notification, evacuation and/or relocation of all 
persons in the building under construction and on the site. 

vi.  The overall under construction, modification, alteration and demolition 

work fire safety plan shall implement the following.                                          
a. Good housekeeping practices.                                                                            
b. On-site security.                                                                                                     
c. Installation of temporary and new fire protection systems as construction 
work progresses.                                                                                                         
d. Preservation of existing fire systems in their good working condition dur-
ing building alteration.                                                                                              
e. Formation and training of an on-site , in-house fire brigade (as first re-
sponders).                                                                                                                    
f. Communication with Civil Defence about fire safety plans and emergency 
preparedness.                                                                                                             
g. Protection of existing structures and equipment, protection of neighbor-
ing structures and equipment. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 946 of 1348 

 

Table 12.1: Responsibilities of Owner and Consultant for Construction Fire Safety 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

3.  CONSULTANT’S 

2. PREPARATION OF FIRE SAFETY AND EVACUATION PLAN FOR BUILDINGS    

RESPONSIBILITY 

UNDER CONSTRUCTION OR RENOVATION OR MODIFICATION OR             
DEMOLITION 

 
The consultant shall ensure that constructor, general contractor or project man-
ager implement a fire safety and evacuation plan before work starts. The plan 
should be prepared by consultant in writing and distributed to all workers and 
contractors on project, including site visitors. The plan shall include but not 
limited to, 
 
i. 
ii.  Procedures for emergency notification, evacuation and/or relocation of all 

Procedures for reporting emergencies to Civil Defence. 

persons in the building under construction and on the site. 

iii.  Procedure for hot work operations, management of hazardous materials 

and removal of combustible debris and maintenance of emergency access 
roads. 

iv.  Floor plans identifying the locations of exits, exit stairs, exit routes and port-

v. 

able fire extinguishers and fire hose cabinets. 
Site plan identifying the designated exterior assembly areas for each evacu-
ation route. 

vi.  Site plan identifying required fire apparatus access roadways and on-site fire 

hydrants. 

vii.  Document and post the name and phone numbers of all personnel responsi-

ble for managing the fire safety evacuation plan, including after-hours con-
tact information. 

viii.  Appointment of fire warden(s) to ensure that everyone evacuates work are-

as when a fire alarm is activated. 

ix.  Post contact information for the security company that overseas “Hot 

x. 

Work” requirements as part of the fire code. Ensure that all construction 
employees are made aware of the “Hot Work” requirements.  
Evacuation plan of already occupied portion of the building. Ensure evacua-
tion plan for occupied portion and portion under construction or renovation 
are compatible. 

xi.  Records of all fire safety meetings with project management, workers, fore-

men, subcontractors, suppliers and others who may be on site. 

xii.  Records of fire drills involving the existing alarm system or on alternative 

such as compressed air horns, shouts of “fire” etc. Conduct a post-mortem 
on response, performance and awareness of personnel. 

xiii.  Procedure in notifying the shutdown of a certain fire safety system to Civil 
Defence and also measures to isolate it from the rest of the system which 
must be in service. 

xiv.  Measures to provide a 24-hour fire watch until the system is fully restored 

and in service. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 947 of 1348 

 
3.2.  Fire Risk Assessment 
 

 3.2.1.   Fire Risk assessment of under construction operations shall be as per Table 12.2. 

Table 12.2: Requirements for Fire Risk Assessment of Construction Operations 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  IDENTIFICATION 

OF HZARDS 

Coming together of Ignition, Fuel and Oxygen is the recipe for any fire to start. 
Any RISK ASSESSMENT should start from identifying these sources. Sources of Ig-
nition, sources of Fuel and sources of Oxygen on construction site that need 
attention are as follows. 
 
1. SOURCES OF IGNITION 
 
 
i. 
ii.  Naked flames from fuel gas or liquid fired, open flame equipment. 
iii.  Faulty Electrical equipment, over loaded electrical sockets and misused elec-

Smoking, matches and cigarette lighters. 

trical equipment, over crowded electrical cables heating up. 

Lighting fixtures installed close to flammable material or stored products. 

iv.  Hot work processes, welding, cutting and sand blasting. 
v. 
vi.  Air conditioning and heating installations. 
vii.  Heat sources such as cooking equipment. 
viii.  Friction generated heat and sparks from mechanical equipment and tools. 
ix.  Static charge from equipment. 
x.  Oxygen fuel fired equipment. 
xi.  Lightening. 
xii.  Arson. 
 
2. SOURCES OF FUEL 
 
i. 
ii. 
iii.  Plastic and wooden storage pallets. 
iv.  Flammable construction Material such as wood, plastic, rubber, Paint, Oil, 

Any material that burns is fuel. 
Stored packaged and cartoned new products. 

Lubricant, insulation etc. 
Flammable chemicals. 

v. 
vi.  Wall panels, composite panels, timber. 
vii.  Protective covers and sheets. 
viii.  Stored fuel for vehicles and equipment. 
ix.  Liquid Petroleum Gas stored on site, used in cylinders for hot work. 
 
3. SOURCES OF OXYGEN 
 
i.  Natural airflow through narrow gaps on tall wall systems and facades can 

cause chimney effect and feed the fire. 

ii.  Oxidizing agents. 
iii.  Oxygen used in welding processes. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 948 of 1348 

 

3.3.  Preventive Actions 
 

3.3.1. 

 
3.3.2. 

 Once the responsible entities understand their role and responsibilities as per Section 
3.1 and Identify the sources contributing to the fire accident as per Section 3.2., pre-
ventive actions need to be taken. 

 Preventive actions to be taken at under construction or alteration or modification or 
demolition sites shall be as per Table 12.3. 

Table 12.3: Required Preventive Actions to be taken 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  SITE SECURITY 

i. 

ii. 

Security Guard service shall be provided to the construction site to safeguard 
the construction premises from arson, vandalism, unauthorized entries, unin-
formed people using equipment and tools which all can compromise construc-
tion activity safety and could be causes of fire accidents. 
The guard(s) shall be trained in the following:                                                           
a. Notification procedures that include calling the Civil Defence, Program Man-
ager and Management personnel.                                                                               
b. Usage of Fire Alarm, Notification and fire protection equipment.                     
c. knowledge of various fire hazards                                                                            
d. Usage of construction elevators.                             

iii.  Guards shall be informed of any special status of emergency equipment or haz-

ards. 

iv.  Security fences shall be provided where required.  
v. 

Entrances (e.g., doors and windows) to the structure under construction, alter-
ation, or demolition shall be secured. 

vi.  Provision of CCTV system should be considered to assist security guards and 

enhance their efficiency.  

2. SMOKING 

i. 

Smoking shall be prohibited at or in the vicinity of hazardous operations or 
combustible/flammable materials. “NO SMOKING” signs shall be posted in the-
se areas. 
Smoking shall be permitted strictly only in designated areas, away from stor-
age, construction activity, garbage disposal areas and flammable materials. 
iii.  Where smoking is permitted, safe receptacles for smoking materials shall be 

ii. 

provided. 

iv.  Appropriate cigarette butt disposal ‘ash treys’, ‘sand cans’ shall be provided at 

the designated smoking areas. 

v.  Garbage cans shall not be used to dispose off the cigarette butts.  

3. WASTE        

i. 

DISPOSAL 

Accumulations of combustible waste material, dust, and debris shall be re-
moved from the structure and its immediate vicinity at the end of each work 
shift or more frequently as necessary for safe operations. 

ii.  Rubbish shall not be burned on the construction premises. 
iii.  Materials susceptible to spontaneous ignition, such as oily rags, shall be stored 

in a listed disposal container. 

iv.  Trash chutes shall be used responsibly and for the purpose. reactive materials, 

reactive chemicals, oxidizers shall not be disposed into trash chute. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 949 of 1348 

Table 12.3: Required Preventive Actions to be taken 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

4.  TEMPORARY       

OFFICES,               

ACCOMODATIONS, 

STORAGE SHEDS 

(MODULAR/

MANUFACTURED 

HOMES) 

i.  Consultant shall prepare drawings for temporary offices, accommodations, 

sheds etc. as per Civil Defence regulations, drawing submission require-
ments and submit to Civil Defence for formal approval as any other project. 
See Chapter 19. Drawing Submission Requirements. 

ii.  Temporary/Modular Housing/Manufactured Homes/Modular Offices shall 

be made of non combustible material and shall comply with Chapter 1.   
Table 1.9.58. 

iii.  Separation distances between buildings under construction and construc-
tion-related structures, such as modular offices, modular housing, tempo-
rary offices, trailers, sheds, and other facilities for the storage of tools and 
materials having combustible construction or contents, shall be in accord-
ance with Table 12.3.a.  

iv.   Adequate detachment between temporary structures shall be provided to 

v. 

minimize spread of fire. 
 Adequate temporary fire detection, fixed fire protection systems and port-
able fire fighting equipment shall be provided as required by the consult-
ant’s Civil Defence approved layout of temporary and modular homes/
offices. 

vi.  Only safely installed and Civil Defence approved cooking appliances and 

methods shall be used in temporary offices and sheds. 

vii.   Clearance shall be provided around stoves, heaters, and all chimney and 

vent connectors to prevent ignition of adjacent combustible materials. 

viii.  Vertical Positioning of Manufactured Homes. Manufactured homes shall 

not be positioned vertically, stacked with one over the other, in whole or in 
part, unless the structure is designed and approved for such installation and 
permitted by the authority having jurisdiction. 

ix.   The location of underground electrical cables, gas piping, water piping, and 

sewer lines that are buried within 1.2 m of the perimeter of the site's larg-
est planned manufactured home shall be indicated by an aboveground sign
(s) or underground marker tapes identifying the proximity of the lines.  
 A plot plan showing the “as built” location of underground utility lines shall 
be available for installations in multiple-site facilities. 

x. 

xi.   Installation of all manufactured homes, including the installation of the 

support system and the connection of structural, electrical, mechanical, and 
plumbing systems to the site utilities or between sections in the case of 
multiple-section homes, shall be performed in accordance with printed in-
stallation instructions provided by the manufacturer of the home. 

xii.   All manufactured homes, accessory buildings, structures, and community 
buildings shall be located and maintained in such a manner that required 
egress windows or doors are not blocked. 

 

Table 12.3.a.: Separation Distances for Temporary Modular Homes, Offices and structures 

TEMPORARY STRUCTURE’S EXPOSING 
WALL LENGTH 

MINIMUM SEPARATION DISTANCE FROM 
BUILDING UNDER CONSTRUCTION 

1. Up to 6 m 

2. 9 m 

3. 12 m 

4. 15 m 

5. 18 m 

6. More than 18 m 

 

9 m 

11 m 

12 m 

14 m 

15 m 

18 m 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 950 of 1348 

 

Table 12.3: Required Preventive Actions to be taken 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

5. TEMPORARY        

ENCLOSURES 

i. 

ii. 

 Only noncombustible panels, flame-resistant tarpaulins or approved materials 
of equivalent fire-retardant characteristics shall be used. 
 Any other fabrics or plastic films used shall be certified as conforming to the 
requirements of Test Method #2 contained in NFPA 701, Standard Methods of 
Fire Tests for Flame Propagation of Textiles and Films. See Chapter 1. Section 
7. 
 Where used to enclose structures, forming equipment and similar items, the 
enclosing material shall be fastened securely or guarded by construction so it 
cannot be blown by the wind against heaters or other sources of ignition. 
iv.  Temporary enclosures shall be equipped with at least one fire extinguisher 

iii. 

suitable for all classes of Fires that are expected in that enclosure. Extinguish-
ers shall comply with Chapter 4. Fire Extinguishers. 

 Internal combustion engines and associated equipment, such as air compres-
sors, hoists, derricks, generators, pumps and similar devices shall be located 
so that the exhausts discharges well away from combustible materials. 
 Where the exhausts are piped outside the structure under construction, alter-
ation, or demolition, a clearance of at least 230 mm shall be maintained be-
tween such piping and combustible material. 
 Internal combustion engines and associated equipment shall be shut down 
and allowed to cool sufficiently prior to refueling. 
 Service areas for equipment shall not be located within structures under con-
struction, alteration, or demolition. 
 Fuel for internal combustion engines shall not be stored within structures un-
der construction, alteration, or demolition. 

 Temporary heating equipment such as LPG fueled, Oil-fired heaters shall be 
listed and shall be installed, used, and maintained in accordance with the 
manufacturer’s instructions. 
 Chimney or vent connectors, where required from direct-fired heaters, shall 
be maintained at least 460 mm from combustibles.  
 Heating equipment shall be secured properly and kept clear from combustible 
materials. Refueling operations shall be conducted in approved manner. 
 Heating devices shall not be used in areas where flammable liquids are being 
sprayed. Propane and kerosene heaters are prohibited inside buildings. 
Heating equipment shall not be kept unattended when it is operating. 
 Heating equipment shall be located a minimum of 1 m away from combusti-
bles and in an area where it is not likely to overturn. 
 Temporary heating equipment, where utilized, shall be monitored for safe op-
eration and maintained by properly trained personnel. 

 Construction materials (drop clothes, tarps etc.) shall be non combustible or 
fire retardant with a maximum flame spread of 25, as tested in accordance 
with ASTM E-84 or UL 723. 
 Plastic sheeting shall be fire retardant type. 
 Wood used in temporary or permanent construction shall be fire retardant 
pressure impregnated. 
 All materials used for temporary or permanent construction shall comply with 
SD410 requirements.  

6.  EQUIPMENT/

i. 

MOTORIZED   

EQUIPMENT 

ii. 

iii. 

iv. 

v. 

7. TEMPORARY    

i. 

HEATING        

EQUIPMENT 

ii. 

iii. 

iv. 

v. 

vi. 

8. CONSTRUCTION 

i. 

MATERIALS 

ii. 
iii. 

iv. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 951 of 1348 

 

Table 12.3: Required Preventive Actions to be taken 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

9. ASPHALT TAR 

KETTLES 

i. 

ii. 

iii. 

iv. 

v. 

vi. 

 Asphalt kettles shall not be located within 6.1m of any combustible material, 
combustible building surface or building opening. 
 With the exception of thermostatically controlled kettles, an attendant shall 
be within 30m of a kettle when the heat source is opening. 
 Ladders or similar obstacles shall not form a part of the route between the 
attendance and the kettle. Kettles shall be equipped with tight fitting covers. 
 Mops and rags soaked with tar have potential to ignite spontaneously and 
therefore must be thoroughly cleaned and stored away from the structure 
and combustibles. 
 A 10 pound ABC-type portable fire extinguisher shall be provided within 9.1m 
of the kettle. Water extinguishers shall not be used. 
 A minimum 20-B:C rated portable fire extinguisher shall be located within    
9.1 m of each asphalt kettle when the heat source is operating. 

vii.   Minimum 20-B:C rated portable fire extinguishers also shall be located on 

roofs during asphalt coating operations.  

10. VEHICLE  

i. 

All vehicles shall be parked a minimum of 20 feet (6.1m) from new buildings 
under construction with following exceptions. 

ii.  Vehicles that are parked temporarily for loading/unloading or other construc-
tion related operations. However such vehicles shall not be left unattended. 
iii.  Private vehicles maybe parked in parking garages of construction site if the 

automatic fire sprinkler system is in service and vertical openings are protect-
ed. 

PARKING 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 952 of 1348 

 

 

3.4.  Work Permit Culture 
 

3.4.1. 

 Every type of work conducted on construction site such as Hot Work, Cold Work, Con-
fined Space Work, Electrical Work etc. shall be through work permit procedure, where 
authorized safety team and supervisor issues work permits to contractor team leader 
upon enquiring nature of work involved and safety measures that are in place and need 
to be taken, including personal protective equipment, associated equipment shut-offs 
and work site inspection. Such work permit practices shall be followed as required by 
Table 12.4. 

 

Table 12.4: Work Permit Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. WORK PERMIT CULTURE 
 
i.  Hot work includes any work involving operations capable of initiating fires or 

explosions, including cutting, welding, brazing, soldering, grinding, thermal 
spraying, thawing pipe, torch applied roofing or any other similar activity.  

ii.  The use of hot work equipment shall be in accordance with the following re-

quirements, including a pre-site inspection, fire watch and post inspection pro-
cedures.  

iii.  Written permission shall be obtained 24 hours in advance of work from the con-
tracting officer’s technical representative or team leader and building operation 
manager. 

iv.   Internal permit shall be issued on a daily basis for all welding, cutting, brazing 

and other open flame producing operations when it is determined that the        
a. Work can be done safely at the requested location.                                              
b. Combustibles have been separated from the work area.                                      
c. The atmosphere is not flammable                                                                             
d. A fire watch is posted for the work period and 30 minutes thereafter. 

v.  An inspection of the hot work site shall be conducted by the general contractor 
or his/her designee prior to hot work operations to ensure the following.           
a. The hot work site is clear of combustibles or that combustibles are protected.     
b. Exposed construction is of non combustible materials or that combustible 
materials are protected.                                                                                                   
c. Openings are to be protected.                                                                                    
d. There are no exposed combustibles on the opposite side of the partitions, 
walls, ceilings, floors etc.                                                                                                  
e. Fire extinguishers are available, fully charged and operable.                                
f. Fire watch personnel are assigned, equipped and trained. 

vi.  The fire watch shall be maintained a minimum of 30 minutes after the conclu-

sion of the work to look out for leftover sparks, slag or smoldering combustibles.  

vii.  “Work Permit” culture shall be strictly followed. 
viii. The Hot Work Permit Tag shall be available on work location at all times. 
 

1.  HOTWORK 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 953 of 1348 

 

Table 12.4: Work Permit Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  HOTWORK 

2. FIRE WATCH 
 
i.  The sole duty of fire watch personnel shall be to watch for occurrence of fire 

during and after hot work operations. Individuals designated to fire watch duty 
shall have fire extinguishing equipment readily available and shall be trained in 
the use of such equipment. Personnel assigned to fire watch shall be responsible 
for extinguishing spot fires and communicating an alarm.  

 
3. THERMIT WELDING 
 
i. 

In Thermit welding, the mold shall be dried thoroughly before the charge is ig-
nited and provided with a cover. 
 Bulk storage of Thermit welding materials shall be maintained in a detached 
shed at least 15 m from the main buildings. 

ii. 

iii.   Storage sheds shall be maintained dry, posted as a “no smoking” area, and kept 

locked. 

iv.   Containers for the starting material shall be closed tightly immediately after 

v. 

each use. 
 The molds shall not be removed until sufficient cooling has taken place in ac-
cordance with the manufacturer’s published instructions. 

vi.   Smoking shall not be permitted in areas where Thermit welding material is being 

used. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 954 of 1348 

 

 

3.5.  Safe Storage and Handling Practices 
 

3.5.1. 

 Safe Storage and handling Practices shall be followed by all the contractors and suppli-
ers  as required by Table 12.5. 

 

Table 12.5.: Safe Storage and Handling Practices 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  FLAMMABLE 

AND           

COMBUSTIBLE 

LIQUIDS/

GASES 

1. STORAGE 
 
i.  The following requirements shall apply to storage areas for flammable and com-

bustible liquids and flammable gases  

ii.  Storage areas shall be kept free of weeds and extraneous combustible material.  
iii.   Open flames and smoking shall be prohibited in storage areas.  
iv.   Storage of Class I and Class II liquids shall not exceed 227 L (60 gal) within 15 m 

v. 

of the structure. 
 Storage areas shall be kept free of weeds, debris, and combustible materials not 
necessary to the storage. 

vi.   Open flames and smoking shall not be permitted in flammable and combustible 

liquids storage areas. 

vii.   Such storage areas shall be appropriately posted as “No Smoking” areas. 
viii.  Tanks and containers shall be marked with the name of the product and sign, 

“FLAMMABLE – KEEP FIRE AND FLAME AWAY”  

ix.   Tanks (i.e. containers in excess of 60 gallons) shall also be labeled.                 

x. 

“KEEP 50 FEET (15m) FROM BUILDINGS”  
 Overnight storage of combustible paints and liquids inside or within 15m of a 
building shall not exceed 10 gallons, unless stored within an approved flamma-
ble liquids storage cabinet in a location approved by building management. 

 
2. HANDLING 
 
i.  At least one portable fire extinguisher (10 pound ABC type or 20-B type) shall be 
located no less than 3m and no more than 15m from the flammable liquids stor-
age area.  

ii.  Class I and Class II liquids shall be kept in approved safety containers  
iii.  Metal containers for Class I or Class II  liquids shall be in accordance with NFPA 
30, 30A requirements or shall be of an approved design. Discharge devices shall 
not cause an internal pressure on the container. Individual containers shall not 
be interconnected and shall be kept closed when not in use  

iv.  Secondary containment or means of spill control, drainage control and diking 

shall be required for containers and tanks as approved by the Fire Department 
and if applicable, local hazardous materials program agency  

v.  Means shall be provided to dispose of leakage and spills promptly and safely. 
vi.  Class I liquids shall be dispensed only where there are no open flames or other 

sources of ignition within the possible path of vapor travel. 

vii.  Plans for the installation/use of any aboveground storage tank (i.e. container 

greater than 60 gallons) shall be submitted to the Civil Defence and if applicable, 
to local hazardous material program agency for review and permit prior to pro-
posed tank arriving at the site.  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 955 of 1348 

Table 12.5.: Safe Storage and Handling Practices 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

2.  EXPLOSIVE 

MATERIALS 

1. STORAGE AND HANDLING 
 
i.  The storage, handling, and use of explosive materials shall be in accordance with 

NFPA 495, Explosive Materials Code and ‘Code of Practice for the Management 
of Dangerous Goods in the Emirates’ issued by Dubai Municipality. 

ii.  All blasting operations shall be under the direct supervision of an individual who 

is legally licensed to use explosives and who possesses the required permits. 

3. COMBUSTIBLE 

i.  Combustible construction materials shall be stored a minimum of 6m from 

MATERIALS 

4. COMPRESSED 

GASES 

buildings under construction or undergoing remodel, except for                            
a. Materials that are staged for installation on a floor level.                                    
b. When approved by the Civil Defence, materials may be stored in parking gar-
ages of Type I construction if the automatic fire sprinkler system is in service and 
vertical openings are protected. 

ii.  Wood, cardboard, packing material, forms lumber and similar combustible de-
bris shall not be accumulated within buildings. Such debris, rubbish and waste 
material shall be removed from buildings on a daily basis. 

iii.  Oily rags and similar material shall be stored in metal or other approved con-

tainers equipped with tight fitting covers. 

1. STORAGE AND HANDLING 
 
i.  Combustible materials shall be kept a minimum of 3m from gas containers. 
ii.  Cylinders shall be protected against physical damage. 
iii.  Cylinders shall be stored upright and secured to prevent falling. 
iv.  Cylinders shall not be placed near elevators, unprotected platform edges or oth-

er areas where they drop more than 0.61m. 

v.  Cylinders shall not be placed in areas where they may be damaged by falling 

objects. 

vi.  When cylinders are not in use, valve protective caps shall be in place. 
vii.  Ropes, chains or slings shall not be used to suspend gas cylinders, unless the 

cylinder was manufactured with appropriate lifting attachments. 

viii. When stored, gas cylinders shall be separated from each other based on their 

hazard classes. 

ix.  Gas cylinders shall be marked with the name of the contents.  

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 956 of 1348 

Table 12.5.: Safe Storage and Handling Practices 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

5.  LPG 

(LIQUIFIED 

PETROLEUM 

GAS) 

1. STORAGE  
 
i. 

LPG Cylinder storage shall comply with Chapter 11. Liquefied Petroleum Gas 
Design and Installation of this code and NFPA 58. Liquefied Petroleum Gas 
Code.  

 
2. HANDLING 
 
i.  Heating elements (other than integral heater-container units) shall be located at 

ii. 

least 1.8 m from any LP-Gas container. 
Integral heater-container units specifically designed for the attachment of the 
heater to the container, or to a supporting standard attached to the container, 
maybe used provided they are designed and installed so as to prevent direct or 
radiant heat application to the LP-Gas container. 

iii.  Blower and radiant type units shall not be directed toward any LP-Gas container 

within 6m. 

iv.  Heat producing equipment shall be installed with clearance to the combustible 

in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions. 

v.  Cylinders shall comply with Civil Defence Material approval specifications as per 

Chapter 11. Liquefied Petroleum Gas Design and Installation. Section 6. and 
shall be secured in an upright position. 

vi.  Regulators shall be approved for use with LP-Gas. Fittings shall be designed for 

at least 250 psi service pressures. 

vii.  Hose shall be designed for a working pressure of at least 350 psi ( unless limited 

to 5 psi) and shall be a maximum of 6 feet (1.8m) in length. 

viii. Portable heaters shall be equipped with an approved automatic device to shut 
off the flow of gas to the main burner and to the pilot in the event of flame ex-
tinguishment or combustion failure. Portable heaters with an input of more 
than 50,000 Btu/hr shall be equipped with either a pilot that must be proved 
before the main burner can be turned on or an approved electronic ignition sys-
tem. 

ix.  In addition to the above, for LPG storage/use in buildings undergoing alteration 
and that are fully or partially occupied, specific approval must be obtained from 
the Civil Defence prior to bringing LP-Gas containers on-site. 

x.  The maximum water capacity of individual containers shall be 45 kg and number 
of containers in the building shall not exceed the number of workers assigned to 
using the LP-Gas. 

xi.  LPG Containers shall not be left unattended and shall be stored in dedicated 

lockable storage open space after the usage. 

Points to Ponder 

 

There are several fires that engulfed fully constructed and ready to occupy build-

ings. The fire load in ready to occupy buildings and negligence in putting the Fire 

Detection and Protection Systems in service, costs the building owners huge  

losses. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 957 of 1348 

 

 

3.6.  Electrical Safety 
 

3.6.1. 

 Electrical Safety during construction shall be as per Table 12.6. 

 

Table 12.6.: Electrical Safety Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. ELECTRICAL DEVICES 
 
i.  All construction-operation electrical wiring and equipment for light, heat or 

power purposes shall be in accordance with the applicable provisions of NFPA 
70, National Electrical Code. 

ii.  Electrical devices shall be maintained in a safe condition. 
iii.  Extension cords shall be maintained free from damage. 
iv.  Damaged equipment and cords shall be removed from service until rendered 

safe. 

 
2. WIRING 
 
i.  All branch circuits shall originate in an approved power outlet or panel board. 
ii.  Conductors shall be permitted within multiconductor cord or cable assemblies 

or as open conductors. 

iii.  All conductors shall be protected by overcurrent devices rated for the ampacity 

of the conductors. 

iv.  Runs of open conductors shall be located where the conductors are not subject 

to physical damage, and the conductors shall be fastened at intervals not ex-
ceeding 3 m. 

v.  Each branch circuit that supplies receptacles or fixed equipment shall contain a 

separate equipment grounding conductor where run as an open conductor. 
vi.  Wiring, junction boxes, electrical devices, electrical equipment, panel boards 

etc. shall not be located where water flooding is a possibility. 

 
3. LIGHTING 
 
i.  Temporary lights shall be equipped with guards to prevent accidental contact 

with the bulb unless the construction of the reflector is such that the bulb is 
deeply recessed. 

ii.  Temporary lighting fixtures, such as quartz, that operate at temperatures capa-
ble of igniting ordinary combustibles shall be fastened securely so that the pos-
sibility of their coming in contact with such materials is precluded. 

iii.  Temporary lights shall be equipped with heavy-duty electrical cords with con-

nections and insulation maintained in safe condition.  

iv.  Temporary lights shall not be suspended by their electrical cords unless such 

cords and lights have been designed for that purpose.  

v.  Splices shall have insulation equivalent to that of the cable. 
vi.  Temporary wiring shall be removed immediately upon the completion of the 

construction or purpose for which the wiring was installed.  

1.  ELECTRICAL 

SAFETY 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 958 of 1348 

 

 
3.7.  Safe Work Practices 
 

3.7.1. 

 Construction work shall be performed by various contractors involved in a professional 
and safe manner as required by   Table 12.7. 

 

Table 12.7.: Safe Work Practices 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  SCAFFOLDING, 

i.  Accumulations of unnecessary combustible forms or form lumber shall be pro-

SHORING AND 

FORMS 

2. LPG AND    

NATURAL GAS 

hibited. 

ii.  Combustible forms or form lumber shall be brought into the structure only 

when needed. 

iii.  Combustible forms or form lumber shall be removed from the structure as soon 

as stripping is complete. 

iv.  Those portions of the structure where combustible forms are present shall not 

be used for the storage of other combustible building materials.  

v.  During forming and stripping operations, portable fire extinguishers or charged 
hose lines shall be provided to protect the additional combustible loading ade-
quately. 

vi.  Yard storage of equipment to be installed or combustible construction materials 

shall not be stored closer than 9 m from the structure under construction or 
alteration.  

i.  The installation of gas piping for construction purposes, or modifications to ex-
isting gas piping, gas utilization equipment, or accessories, shall be performed 
only by a qualified company with certified people. 

ii.  All such work shall be in accordance with Chapter 11. Liquefied Petroleum Gas 

Design and Installation of this code, NFPA 58. Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code 
and NFPA 54. National Fuel Code. 

iii.  All modifications to existing gas piping systems shall be performed with the gas 

turned off. 

iv.  Hot taps shall be permitted to be made, provided they are installed by a trained 

and experienced crew utilizing equipment specifically designed for such pur-
pose.  

3. COMPART-

i.  Fire resistance rated walls and exit stairways, where required for the completed 

MENTATION 

building, shall be given priority for execution. 

ii.  Fire doors with approved closing devices and hardware shall be installed as soon 

as is practicable and preferably before combustible material is introduced. 

iii.  Fire doors, after installation shall not be obstructed from closing. 
iv.  Protection shall be provided to separate an occupied portion of the structure 
from a portion of the structure undergoing alteration, construction, or demoli-
tion operations when such operations are considered as having a higher level of 
hazard than the occupied portion of the building. 

v.  Walls shall have at least a 1-hour fire resistance rating. 
vi.  Opening protectives shall have at least a 45-minute fire protection rating. 
vii.  Nonrated walls and opening protectives shall be permitted when an approved 

automatic sprinkler system is installed. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 959 of 1348 

 

Table 12.7.: Safe Work Practices 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

4.  ROOFING 

1. ASPHALT AND TAR KETTLES 
 
i.  Asphalt and tar kettles shall not be located on roofs. 
ii.  A lid that can be closed by means of gravity shall be provided on all roofing 

kettles. 

iii.  The tops and covers of all kettles shall be close-fitting and constructed of steel 

having a thickness of not less than No. 14 manufacturer’s standard gauge 2 mm. 

iv.  Used roofing mops and rags shall be cleaned of excessive asphalt and stored 

away from the building and combustible materials. 

v.  Discarded roofing mops and rags shall not be in contact with combustibles. 
vi.  Kettles shall be constantly attended when in operation by a minimum of one 

employee knowledgeable of the operations and hazards. The employee shall be 
within 7600 mm of the kettle and have the kettle within sight. 

vii.   Roofing kettles shall not block exits, means of egress, gates, roadways, or en-

trances. In no case shall kettles be closer than 3000 mm from exits or means of 
egress. 

 
2. SINGLE PLY AND TORCH APPLIED ROOFING SYSTEMS 
 
i.  Single-ply and torch-applied roofing systems shall be installed using extreme 

caution. 

ii.  Torches or hot-air guns used to secure roofing membranes shall be used in ac-

cordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations. 

iii.  In order to prevent smoking or ignition of roofing membranes, they shall not be 

overheated. 

 
3. WORKING NEAR OPENINGS, PENETRATIONS AND FLASHINGS 
 
i.  Caution shall be used where working near roof openings, penetrations, or flash-

ings. 

ii.  The flame of the torch shall not come in direct contact with wood nailers, cant 

strips, or metal flashing. 

iii.  Small torches shall be used to heat the underside of the membrane at a distance 

from these areas before securement. 

iv.  Hot trowels shall be used to feather seams at laps and flashings. 
v.  The torch shall not be used in areas where the flame impingement cannot be 

fully viewed. 

vi.  Open flames shall not be left unattended. 
 
4. FLAME CONTACT PROTECTION 
 
i.  The torch flame shall not be applied to a combustible substrate for the mem-

brane. 

ii.  Base ply shall be used to cover wooden decks, combustible insulation (such as 
foam plastic, kraft-faced glass fiber, or wood fiber), small crevices, cant strips, 
plastic fastener plates, or any other combustible surface. 

iii.  Base ply shall be permitted to consist of either glass fiber felts or minimum 18 kg 

(40 lb) organic felts. 

iv.  Torch flames shall not come in contact with exposed plastic roofing cement. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 960 of 1348 

 

Table 12.7.: Safe Work Practices 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

4.  ROOFING  5. TORCH APPLIED ROOFING IS HOTWORK 

 
i.  The installation of torch-applied roofing and, in some cases, single-ply roofing sys-
tems is hot work and shall comply with Section 3.4., of this chapter, except where 
otherwise noted. 

ii.  Torch-applied roofing shall be exempt from the requirement in NFPA 51B, Standard 
for Fire Prevention During Welding, Cutting, and Other Hot Work, that combustibles 
shall be kept 11 m from hot work, commonly referred to as the “35 Foot Rule.” 

 
6. EQUIPMENT 
 
i.  Proper equipment shall be used to heat roofing membranes. 
ii.  Torches shall be equipped with a pilot adjustment, a flame height adjustment, a min-
imum of 7600 mm to a maximum of 15 m of listed hose, a pressure gauge, and a reg-
ulator. 

iii.  A spark igniter shall be used. 
iv.  Torch trolleys and multiple torch head machines shall be equipped with listed safety 

valves. 

v.  Equipment shall be inspected thoroughly and repaired or replaced as needed prior to 

use. 

 
7. FUEL GAS CYLINDERS 
 
i.  Fuel gas cylinders shall not be hoisted by their valves. 
ii.  Straps placed around the cylinders shall be utilized. 
iii.  Carts used to transport fuel gas cylinders shall be stable. 
iv.  Safety caps shall be attached to all fuel gas cylinders and installed on the valves 

whenever cylinders are not in use. 

v.  The fuel gas cylinder shall be sized for the torch used . 
 
8. FROST BUILDUP 
 
i. 

If frost buildup occurs on fuel gas cylinders and the rate of vapor withdrawal is no 
longer adequate for operating conditions, the cylinder shall not be placed on its side 
or heated with the torch flame. 

ii.  The hose shall be disconnected and a larger cylinder shall be used.  
 
9. FIRE EXTINGUISHERS FOR ROOFING OPERATIONS 
 
i.  There shall be at least one portable fire extinguisher having a rating of not less than 

20-B no closer than 1500 mm and no more than 7600 mm of horizontal travel dis-
tance from every kettle at all times while such kettle is in operation. 

ii.  Fire extinguishers shall be located in an accessible, visible, or identified location. 
iii.  There shall be at least one multipurpose 2-A:20-B:C portable fire extinguisher on the 

roof being covered or repaired, or other fire protection shall be provided as deter-
mined by the authority having jurisdiction. 

iv.  There shall be at least one multipurpose 2-A:20-B:C portable fire extinguisher within 

6100 mm) of horizontal travel distance from torch-applied roofing equipment. 

v.  All kettle operators and torch-applied roof installers shall be trained in the use of fire 

extinguishers. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 961 of 1348 

 

Table 12.7.: Safe Work Practices 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

4.  ROOFING 

5.  DEMOLITION 

OPERATIONS 

10. FUEL FOR ROOFING OPERATIONS 
 
i.  Fuel containers, burners, and related appurtenances of roofing equipment in 

which liquefied petroleum gas is used for heating shall comply with all the appli-
cable requirements of NFPA 58, Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code. 

ii.  Fuel containers having capacities greater than 0.45 kg (1 lb) shall be located at 

least 3000 mm from the burner flame or at least 600 mm there from where 
properly insulated from heat or flame. 

iii.  Solid fuel or Class I liquids shall not be used as fuel for roofing kettles. 
iv.  LP-Gas cylinders shall be secured to prevent accidental tip over. 
v.  Where in the opinion of the authority having jurisdiction, there is danger of 

physical damage to the fuel containers, protection shall be provided. 

1. SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS 
 
i.  Special precautions shall be taken where demolition work is performed in areas 
where floors are soaked with oil or other flammable liquid; where dust accumu-
lations are present; or where combustible insulation is present in floors, walls, 
or ceilings/roofs where hot work is being performed. In these situations, 
charged fire hose lines of an adequate number shall be provided. 

ii.  Flammable and combustible liquids shall be drained from tanks and machinery 

reservoirs in a safe manner and removed from the building immediately.  

iii.  Particular attention shall be paid to the removal of residue and sludge accumu-

lations if hot work operations are involved. 

 
2. DEMOLITION USING EXPLOSIVES 
 
i. 

If explosives are used in demolition work (implosion), fire hose lines at least two 
of 38 mm (1.5 in.) diameter or one 64 mm (2.5 in.) diameter] shall be provided 
in the immediate vicinity of the demolition site during the actual detonation. 
ii.  The required fire hose lines shall be of sufficient length to be capable of extin-

guishing any small fire anywhere on the demolition site after detonation. 

 
3. FUEL GAS SUPPLY 
 
i.  Prior to demolition, gas supplies shall be turned off and capped at a point out-

side the building. 

ii.  Gas lines within the building shall be purged after capping. 

6.  FIRE            

i.  Where construction site fire protection systems are provided as per Section 3.8. 

PROTECTION 

SYSTEMS 

and building is equipped with sprinklers, the sprinkler protection shall be re-
tained in service as long as the condition requiring the use of sprinklers exists. 

ii.  The operation of sprinkler control valves shall be permitted only by properly 

authorized personnel and shall be accompanied by the notification of designat-
ed parties. 

iii.  Where the sprinkler protection is regularly turned off and on to facilitate remov-
al and capping of segments, the sprinkler control valves shall be checked at the 
end of each work shift to ascertain that protection is in service. 

iv.  Standpipes shall be maintained in conformity with the progress of construction 

activity in such a manner that they are always ready for fire department use.   

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 962 of 1348 

 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

Table 12.7.: Safe Work Practices 

7.  UNDER 

GROUND    

OPERATIONS 

1. SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS 
 
i. 

In addition to the specific requirements of this section, the provisions of all the 
sections of this chapter shall apply to the underground operations unless other-
wise modified by this chapter. 

ii.  Drainage systems shall be properly designed and installed to remove water from 

sprinkler discharge and fire hose streams. 

iii.  Fire safety for existing, operating, fixed guideway underground transportation 
systems undergoing alteration or renovation shall be in accordance with NFPA 
130, Standard for Fixed Guideway Transit and Passenger Rail Systems. 

iv.  Means of egress for existing, operating, underground structures shall be in ac-

cordance with Chapter 3. Means of Egress. 

 
2. SECURITY 
 
i.  At each aboveground entrance, underground operations shall have a check-in/

check-out system, supervised by a qualified individual at all times, that provides 
an accurate record of each person who is underground. 

ii.  The location of the check-in/check-out system shall be within 7600 mm of the 

entrance and shall be easily identified. 

iii.  Completed or unused sections of the underground facility shall be barricaded, 

properly marked and made off limits. 

iv.  Compartmentation by means of the installation of fire and smoke barriers shall 
be at intervals that limit the extent and severity of the fire and that provide are-
as of refuge for occupants. 

 
3. WATER SUPPLY 
 
i.  A fire protection water supply system shall be provided  as per Section 3.8.  
ii.  No minimum water supply can be specified due to the wide range of construc-

tion types, sites, and sizes. However, unless combustibles are essentially nonex-
istent in the completed structure and occupancy, a minimum of 1893 L/min (500 
gpm) should be provided. In most instances, the required supply is greater and 
the consultant’s proposal shall be submitted to Civil Defence for approval. 

iii.  The fire hose outlets shall be provided so that travel distance does not exceed 

46 m.  

 
4. EVACUATION PLANS 
 
i.  A written fire prevention, fire suppression and emergency evacuation plan shall 

be developed, maintained and kept current. 

ii.  Special attention shall be given to rescue and smoke-venting procedures, to 

means of ingress/egress and to training and orientation of employees and visi-
tors. 

iii.  All personnel, including visitors, shall be trained in emergency and evacuation 

procedures and informed of the hazards prior to going underground.  

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 963 of 1348 

 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

Table 12.7.: Safe Work Practices 

5. EMERGENCY DRILLS 
 
i.  Underground operations shall conduct disaster and evacuation drills for each 
shift at least once at the start of underground operations and every 6 months, 
or more frequently as appropriate. 

ii.  A record of such drills shall be maintained. 
 
6. SAFETY, FIRE DETECTION AND PROTECTION SYSTEMS 
 
i.  Fire protection extinguishing equipment applicable to the hazard shall be pro-

vided at the head, tail, drive, and take-up pulley areas of belt conveyors and at 
intervals along belt conveyor lines that shall not exceed 91 m. 

ii.  Belt conveyors installed in underground locations, other than belts that carry 

the load of the belt on a low-friction metal deck without rollers, shall meet the 
following minimum requirements.                                                                                 
a. Conveyor belting shall be approved.                                                                         
b. Entrances in which belt conveyors are installed shall be kept free of accumu-
lations such as muck, debris, and combustibles.                                                         
c. All belt conveyors shall be equipped with an approved slippage switch system 
designed to shut down the belt when sliding friction develops between the drive 
pulley(s) and the belt.                                                                                                       
d. The slippage switch system shall be tested weekly.                                               
e. On each new installation, the slippage switch system shall be tested before 
the conveyor is used. 

iii.  All conveyor belt systems shall be equipped with approved interlock systems 

that shut down belt conveyors when any conveyor in the system stops or reduc-
es its normal speed or upon activation of any required fire protection system. 
iv.  Fixed combustible materials such as posts, cribbing, and roof supports shall be 
either guarded from contact by the belt using metal or located at a distance of 
at least ½ the width of the belt from any idler or pulley.                                           
a. An alternate method for minimizing potential frictional ignition is the use of 
alignment switches at intervals sufficient to prevent the belt from contacting 
such materials.                                                                                                                   
b. Guarding for machinery in the drive area and at other points along the belt 
shall be of noncombustible material. 

v.  New installations of belt conveyors shall utilize a structure that does not provide 

a deck between the upper and lower strands of the belt.                             

vi.  Suitable fire extinguishers shall be installed so that travel distance from any one 

point in a tunnel does not exceed 91 m (300 ft.) on a horizontal plane. 

vii.  Audible and visible alarm and emergency lighting for safe evacuation shall be 

required. 

viii. Two means of communications with the surface shall be available at all times 

from all areas of the underground facility. 

ix.  All communications systems shall be tested weekly.  

7.  UNDER 

GROUND    

OPERATIONS 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 964 of 1348 

 

Table 12.7.: Safe Work Practices 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

7.  UNDER 

GROUND    

OPERATIONS 

7. ELECTRICAL CONDUCTORS 
 
i.  Electrical cords and plugs shall be heavy duty and suitable for use in damp loca-

tions. 

ii.  Conductors shall be located or guarded so as to be protected from physical 
damage. Multiconductor portable cable shall be permitted to supply mobile 
equipment. 

iii.  An equipment grounding conductor shall be run with circuit conductors inside 

the metal raceway or inside the multiconductor cable jacket. 

iv.  The equipment grounding conductor shall be permitted to be insulated or bare. 
v.  Oil-filled transformers shall only be used underground where located in a fire-
resistant enclosure suitably vented to the outside and surrounded by a dike to 
retain the contents of the transformers in the event of rupture. 

 
8. ELECTRICAL ENCLOSURES 
 
i.  Bare terminals of transformers, switches, motor controllers, and other equip-

ment shall be enclosed to prevent accidental contact with energized parts. 

ii.  Enclosures for use in tunnels shall be raintight, rainproof, or watertight as de-
fined in NFPA 70, National Electrical Code, where necessitated by the environ-
mental conditions. 

iii.  Special attention shall be given to maintaining clear access and adequate work 
space around electrical equipment in accordance with NFPA 70E, Standard for 
Electrical Safety in the Workplace. Proper housekeeping shall be maintained to 
avoid fire hazards. 

iv.  All nonenergized metal parts of electrical equipment and metal raceways and 
cable sheaths shall be effectively grounded and bonded to all metal pipes and 
rails at the portal and at intervals not exceeding 300 m (1000 ft.) throughout the 
tunnel. 

 
9. HAZARDOUS OPERATIONS AND PROCEDURES 
 
i.  Hot work operations shall be in accordance with NFPA 51B, Standard for Fire 

Prevention During Welding, Cutting, and Other Hot Work. 

ii.  A suitable fire extinguisher or other fire control device shall be ready for instant 

use in any location where hot work is performed. 

iii.  Acetylene, liquefied petroleum gas (LPG), liquefied oxygen (LOX), and methyl 

acetylene propadiene stabilized gas (MPS) shall be permitted to be used under-
ground only for welding, cutting, and hot work and only if the quality of air is 
within permitted limits in accordance with the ACGIH Threshold Limit Values 
and Biological Exposure Indices for 1992–1993. 

iv.  The quantity of combustible materials to be used underground shall be kept to a 

minimum. Advance planning shall provide for the use of materials having the 
most favorable combination of high ignition points, low rates of combustion, 
and low emissions of smoke and harmful gases.  

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 965 of 1348 

 

Table 12.7.: Safe Work Practices 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

7.  UNDER 

GROUND    

OPERATIONS 

10. FLAMMABLE AND COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS 
 
i.  Class I flammable liquids shall not be taken, stored, or used underground or 

within 30 m of a tunnel portal or shaft opening. 

ii.  Class II and Class III liquids shall be transported and stored in approved closed 

containers, safety cans, or tanks. 

iii.  Quantities shall be limited to those necessary for one work shift. 
iv.  Lubricating oils, greases, and rope dressings taken underground shall be in 

closed and reclosable approved containers that do not allow the contents to 
leak or spill. 

v.  Oil, grease, and diesel fuel stored underground shall be kept in tightly sealed 

containers in fire-resistant areas located at least 30 m from shafts and inclines. 

vi.  Storage areas shall be positioned or diked so that the contents of ruptured or 

overturned containers cannot flow from the storage area. 

vii.  Areas within 7600 mm of major electrical installations and unburied tanks for 
storage of combustible liquids shall be free of transient combustible materials. 

viii. No combustible structure shall be erected and no combustible materials shall be 

stored within 30 m (100 ft.) of an access shaft, shaft hoist, or other entry. 

ix.  Metal containers with self-closing lids shall be provided and used to store com-
bustible waste and debris and shall be removed and taken to the surface daily.  

 
11. EQUIPMENT 
  
i. 

Less hazardous hydraulic fluids that are listed shall be used in underground ma-
chinery and equipment unless the machinery and equipment are protected by 
an approved fire suppression system or by approved multipurpose fire extin-
guishers rated at least 4-A:40-B:C. 

ii.  Wherever self-propelled equipment is used underground, a fire suppression sys-

tem or a fire extinguisher rated at least 4-A:40-B:C shall be provided on the 
equipment. 

 
12. VENTILATION 
 
i.  Where single-entry shafts/tunnel ventilation systems are used, they shall be re-

versible from a location outside and in close proximity to the shaft/tunnel. 
ii.  The ventilation system shall be sufficient for the number of personnel and 

equipment underground. 

iii.  Air-sampling logs shall be maintained. Air tests shall be conducted before or 

after each shift. 

iv.  Air-sampling logs shall be available to the authority having jurisdiction. 
v.  Fan houses, fan bulkheads for main and booster fans and air ducts connecting 

main fans to underground openings shall be constructed of noncombustible ma-
terials.  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 966 of 1348 

 
3.8.  Fire Access, Means of Egress, Fire Detection and Fire Protection System 

Requirements 

 

 

3.8.1. 

 Fire access road for Civil Defence approach, Means of Egress for evacuation, Fire Detec-
tion and Alarm Systems and Fire protection Systems for under construction, alteration, 
modification or demolition sites shall be as per Table 12.8. 

 

Table 12.8.: Fire Access, Means of Egress, Fire Alarm and Fire Protection Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  FIRE ACCESS 

i. 

ii. 

All construction sites shall be accessible by Civil Defence apparatus by means of 
roadways having an all-weather driving service of not less than 6.1m of unob-
structed width. 
The roads shall have the ability to withstand the live loads of fire apparatus of 
80 tons of distributed load and have a minimum 4.5 m of vertical clearance. 

iii.  Fire access shall not be through basements, underpasses of the building under 

construction. 

iv.  Dead end fire access roads in excess of 45m in length shall be provided with 

approved turnarounds in accordance with Chapter 2. Fire Access. 

v.  A suitable location at the site shall be designated as a command post and pro-

vided with plans, emergency information, keys, communications and equip-
ment, as needed. 

vi.  The person in charge of fire protection shall respond to the location command 

post whenever fire occurs. 

vii.  Where access to or within a structure or an area is unduly difficult because of 

secured openings or where immediate access is necessary for life-saving or fire-
fighting purposes, the Civil Defence personnel shall be permitted to require a 
key box to be installed in an accessible location. 

viii.  Access for use of Civil Defence apparatus shall be provided to the immediate 

job site at the start of the project and maintained until completion. 

ix.  The required width of access roadways shall not be obstructed in any manner, 
including obstruction by parked vehicles, storage material and assembly points. 
Signs or other appropriate notices, or both, prohibiting obstruction shall be 
installed and shall be maintained. 

x. 

xi.  The access roadway shall be extended to within 46 m of all portions of the ex-

terior walls of the first story of any building under construction. 

xii.  Where an access roadway cannot be provided, an approved fire protection sys-

tem or systems shall be provided and approved by the Civil Defence. 

xiii.  Where a bridge is required to be used as access, it shall be constructed and 
maintained using design live loading sufficient to carry the imposed loads of 
the fire apparatus in accordance with Chapter 2. Fire Access. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 967 of 1348 

Table 12.8.: Fire Access, Means of Egress, Fire Alarm and Fire Protection Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

2.  MEANS OF 

EGRESS 

1. MINIMUM NUMBER OF EXITS 
 
i. 

All new buildings under construction shall have at least two unobstructed exits. 
All exits shall be identified in the Fire Protection Plan. 

ii.  Where stairs and exit routes of the building are under construction, exterior 

iii. 

temporary steel stairs and exits shall be provided which lead directly to ground 
floor to the safety of outside the building. 
In multi-story constructions, each level above the first story shall be provided 
with at least two usable exit stairs after the floor decking is installed. The stair-
ways shall be continuous and discharge to grade level. 

iv.  Stairways serving more than two floor levels shall be enclosed (with openings 

adequately protected) after exterior walls/windows are in place. Exit stairs shall 
be lighted and maintained clear of debris and construction materials at all 
times except when one of the required exit stairs is under construction (i.e. 
installation of gypsum board, painting, flooring etc.), but not more than two 
continuous floors. 

v.  All exit stairs shall be provided with stair identification signs to include the floor 

level, stair designation, and exit path direction as required to provide for safe 
egress. 

vi.  Night time construction work shall not be performed without adequate lighting 

in exits, exit stairs and escape routes to safety outside the building. 

 
2. HOISTS AND ELEVATORS 
 
i.  Where hoists and elevators provide the only efficient means of transporting 

hose and other cumbersome fire-fighting equipment to upper floors, they shall 
be available to the Civil Defence at all times. 

 
3. ASSEMBLY POINTS 
 
i.  Designated exterior assembly points shall be established for all construction 
personnel to relocate to upon evacuation. The assembly points shall also be 
identified in Fire Protection Plan.  

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 968 of 1348 

 

Table 12.8.: Fire Access, Means of Egress, Fire Alarm and Fire Protection Requirements 

 

ITEMS 

3.  FIRE            

PROTECTION 

SYSTEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. YARD HYDRANT SYSTEM 
 
i.  Where the building under construction requires Yard Fire Hydrants as per Civil 

Defence approved consultant’s drawings, the Hydrants either temporary or part 
of the permanent hydrant network shall be installed based on the hazard evalua-
tion of the construction site, in compliance with Chapter 9, Section 3.11. 
Fire Pump and water tanks are permitted to be non listed when they are tempo-
rarily installed to safeguard construction activity.  

ii. 

iii.  Temporary Fire pump capacity shall be permitted to be 500 gpm. 
iv.  Permanent fire pump capacity shall be as per Civil Defence approved consultant 

drawings. 
v. 
Temporary fire water tank shall be permitted to be of 60 minutes duration. 
vi.  Permanent fire water tank shall be as per Civil Defence approved consultant 

drawings. 

vii.  Free access from the street to fire hydrants and to outside connections for stand-

pipes, sprinklers, or other fire extinguishing equipment, whether permanent or 
temporary, shall be provided and maintained at all times. 

viii.  Protective pedestrian walkways shall be constructed such that they do not im-

pede access to hydrants. 

ix.  No stored material, debris or construction activity shall interfere with access to 

hydrants, Siamese connections, or fire extinguishing equipment.  

 
2. WET/DRY RISER SYSTEM 
 
i.  Where the consultant design NOC requires dry risers with hose reel system for 
the completed building, the building under construction shall be provided with 
temporary dry risers with hose reel system as per Chapter 9, Section 3.3., with 
50 gpm non listed pump and 60 minutes duration fire water tank. 

ii.  Where the consultant design NOC requires wet risers for the completed building, 

the temporary Wet riser shall be installed when the progress of construction is 
not more than 10.7 m in height above the lowest level of Civil Defence access. 

iii.  Fire Pump and water tanks are permitted to be non listed when they are tempo-

rarily installed to safeguard construction activity, when building height is less 
than 23 m from fire access level.  

iv.  Temporary Fire pump capacity for wet risers shall be permitted to be 500 gpm, 

with single wet riser serving two hose outlets located near the exit stair. 
Temporary fire water tank shall be permitted to be of 60 minutes duration. 

v. 
vi.  When the under construction building height crosses 23 m, permanent wet riser 

system, as per consultant’s approved drawing, shall be in place and in working 
condition. 

vii.  Permanent fire pump capacity and number of wet risers shall be as per Civil De-

fence approved consultant drawings. 

viii.  Permanent fire water tank shall be as per Civil Defence approved consultant 

drawings. 

ix.  Standpipes shall be provided with breeching inlets, Civil Defence hose connec-

x. 

tions and outlets at accessible locations adjacent to usable stairs. 
The standpipe system shall be extended as construction progresses to within one 
floor of the highest point of construction having secured decking or flooring. 

xi.  Each floor shall be provided with 2 ½ in. (64mm) valve outlet for Civil Defence 

xii. 

use.  
In all new buildings in which standpipes are required or where standpipes exist in 
buildings being altered or demolished, such standpipes shall be maintained in 
conformity with the progress of building construction in such a manner that they 
are always ready for use. 

xiii.  All the hose outlets shall be in hose cabinet as per Chapter 9, Section 3.3 and 

 

3.4. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 969 of 1348 

 

 

Figure 13.1: Fire Protection Systems for Under Construction Buildings 

Points to Ponder 

Because of the huge occupant load of workers on construction sites, under construction 

exit stairs and accumulation of large quantity of construction materials in exit ways, the 

emergency evacuation by workers is not always easy. 

Alternative methods of escaping from higher floors such as escape chutes, escape lad-

ders and escape slides should be considered and provided as per manufacturer’s guide-

lines and safety precautions along with training workers of their usage. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 970 of 1348 

 

Table 12.8.: Fire Access, Means of Egress, Fire Alarm and Fire Protection Requirements 

 

ITEMS 

3.  FIRE            

PROTECTION 

SYSTEMS 

 

REQUIREMENTS 

3. AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEMS 
 
i.  Where temporary automatic sprinkler systems are considered to be provided for 
under construction buildings, 500 gpm temporary fire pump with 30 minutes op-
eration fire water tank shall be permitted. 

ii.  Where permanent automatic Fire Sprinkler systems are required to be installed 

iii. 

in new buildings as per consultant’s approved drawing from Civil Defence, the 
system shall be placed in service as soon as it is feasible and before interior finish 
work commences. 
Immediately upon the completion of sprinkler pipe installation on each floor lev-
el, the piping shall be hydrostatically tested and inspected. After inspection ap-
proval from the Civil Defence, each floor level of sprinkler piping shall be con-
nected to the system supply riser and placed into service. 

iv.  For system activation notification, an exterior alarm bell can be installed and con-

v. 

nected to the sprinkler water flow device prior to installation of the monitoring 
system. 
For buildings equipped with fire sprinkler systems that are undergoing altera-
tions, the sprinkler system(s) shall remain in service at all times except when sys-
tem modifications are necessary.  

vi.  Fire sprinkler systems undergoing modifications shall be returned to service at 

the end of each workday unless otherwise approved by the Civil Defence.  

vii.  The general contractor or his/her designee shall check the sprinkler control valve
(s) at the end of each work day to confirm that system has been restored to ser-
vice. 

viii.  New building or building undergoing modifications shall not be occupied until the 

sprinkler installation has been entirely completed, tested and in service as per 
Chapter 9, Section 3.5.  

ix.  The provision of Table 12.8.3.5.vii. shall not prohibit occupancy of the lower 
floors of a building, even where the upper floors are in various stages of con-
struction or protection, provided the following conditions are satisfied:                
a. The sprinkler protection of the lower occupied floors is completed, tested and 
in service.                                                                                                                               
b. The sprinkler protection of the upper floors is supplied by entirely separate 
systems and separate control valves so that the absence or incompleteness of 
protection in no way impairs the sprinkler protection of the occupied lower 
floors.                                                                                                                                     
c. Where the sprinkler protection is regularly turned off and on to facilitate con-
nection of newly completed segments, the sprinkler control valves shall be 
checked at the end of each work shift to ascertain that protection is in service. 

 
4. FIRE EXTINGUISHERS 
 
i. 

Portable Fire Extinguishers shall be provided and shall be mounted on a wall or 
post at each usable stairway, such that the travel distance to any extinguisher 
does not exceed 23 m.  

ii.  Mounting height to the top of the extinguisher shall not exceed 1.5m. Extinguish-
ers shall not have less than a 2A10BC rating or as per Chapter 4. Fire Extinguish-
ers. 

iii.  Wherever a tool house, storeroom, or other shanty is located in or adjacent to 
the building under construction or demolition or where a room or space within 
that building is used for storage, a dressing room or a workshop, at least one ap-
proved extinguisher shall be provided and maintained in an accessible location. 

iv.  At least one approved fire extinguisher also shall be provided in plain sight on 

each floor at each usable stairway as soon as combustible material accumulates. 
Suitable fire extinguishers shall be provided on self-propelled equipment. 

v. 
vi.  Free access to permanent, temporary or portable first aid Civil Defence shall be 

maintained at all times.  

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 971 of 1348 

Table 12.8.: Fire Access, Means of Egress, Fire Alarm and Fire Protection Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

4.  FIRE  DETECTION 

AND ALARM    

SYSTEM 

1. DURING CONSTRUCTION 
 
i. 

Temporary Fire Detection and Alarm System, with same features as perma-
nent Fire Detection and Alarm System as per Chapter 8, to cover the floors 
that have been constructed is highly recommended. 

ii.  Manual Fire Detection and Alarm System as per Chapter 8, Section 4.10. 

shall be permitted. 

iii.  Wireless/Low powered Radio frequency based Fire Detection and Alarm 
System as per Chapter 8, Section 4.11. shall be permitted and shall com-
municate with 24X7 signaling of Civil Defence, where available. 

iv.  Wireless/Low powered radio frequency based fire Detection and Alarm 
System are best suited for construction sites, as they can be installed on 
temporary basis without wiring. 

v.  Alarm notification shall be such that affected area construction site shall be 
notified with sound and visual devices. audio devices shall have sound level 
of 15 dB more than the ambient sound level. 

 
2. DURING ALTERATION OR MODIFICATION 
 
i. 

Fire alarm systems shall be maintained operational at all times during 
building alterations. When an alteration requires modifications to a portion 
of the fire alarm system, the portion of the system requiring work shall be 
isolated and the remainder of the system shall be kept in service whenever 
practical.  

ii.  When it is necessary to shut down an entire fire alarm system, a fire watch 
or other mitigation approved by the Civil Defence shall be implemented by 
the Consultant and Program Manager until the system is returned to full 
service.  

iii.  Where the automatic Fire Detection and Alarm System is regularly turned 
off and on to facilitate connection of newly completed segments, the Sys-
tem shall be checked at the end of each work shift to ascertain that com-
pleted are Fire Detection and Alarm System is in service. 

i. 
5. TELEPHONE AND        

COMMUNICATION 

SYSTEMS 

ii. 

There shall be a readily available public fire alarm box near the premises, 
telephone service to the responding Civil Defence, or equivalent communi-
cations facilities. 
Instructions shall be issued for the immediate notification of the Civil De-
fence in case of a fire emergency.  

iii.  Where telephone service is employed, the Civil Defence number (997) and 

site address shall be conspicuously posted near each telephone. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 972 of 1348Chapter 13 
FLAMMABLE AND 
COMBUSTIBLE LIQUID USAGE 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 973 of 1348In this Chapter: 
Î Storage, handling and use of flammable and combustible liquids 
Î Minimum required separation distances from flammable and 

combustible liquid storage 

Î  Maximum allowed quantity of flammable and combustible liquids 

Intent of the Chapter 

•  To provide guidelines to designers, users, producers, distributors 

and those involved with safe handling, storage and use of 
flammable and combustible liquids. 

•  To restrict flammable and combustible liquids to maximum 

allowed quantities occupancy wise. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 974 of 1348 

In this Chapter : 

Intent of the Chapter  

  To provide guidelines to designers, users, producers, 

distributors and those involved with safe handling, 
storage and use of Flammable and Combustible liquids 

  To restrict flammable and combustible liquids to  

maximum allowed quantities occupancy wise. 

  Storage, handling and use of 
Flammable and combustible 
liquids 

  Minimum required separation 
distances from flammable and 
combustible liquid storage 

  Maximum Allowed Quantity of 

flammable and combustible 
liquids 

1. Definitions 

  1.1. General 

It is a mandatory requirement by Civil Defence 

It is a suggested requirement recommended by Civil Defence but not mandatory. 

Approved and registered by individual Emirates’ Civil Defence material department. 

Approved and registered by individual Emirates’ Civil Defence material department. 

 
1.1.1.  Shall  
 
 
1.1.2.  Should 
 
 
1.1.3.  Listed 
 
 
1.1.4.  Approved 
 
 
1.1.5.  Gallon (U.S.) 
 
 
1.1.6.  Barrel 
 

1 U.S. gal = 3.785 L. 

A unit of volume used in the petroleum industry that is equal to 0.159 m3 (159 L or 42 
gal). 

 
1.1.7.  Boiling Point 
 

The temperature at which the vapor pressure of a liquid equals the surrounding atmos-
pheric pressure. 

 
1.1.8.  Flash Point 
 

The minimum temperature of a liquid at which sufficient vapor is given off to form an ig-
nitable mixture with the air, near the surface of the liquid or within the vessel used. 

The pressure, measured in pounds per square inch, absolute (psia), exerted by a liquid. 

 
1.1.9.  Vapor Pressure 
 
 
1.1.10.  Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) 
 

It is a document that gives detailed information about the nature of that particular chemi-
cal, such as                                                                                                                                               
a. Physical and chemical properties                                                                                                    
b. Health, safety, fire and environmental hazards                                                                             
c. Handling, storage and transportation requirements  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 975 of 1348 

1.1. General 

 
1.1.11.  Low Flammable Limit (LFL) or Lower Explosive Limit (LEL) 
 

The concentration of a flammable vapor in air below which ignition will not occur. It is also 
known as Lower Explosive Limit. 

 
1.1.12.  Fire Point 
 

The lowest temperature at which a liquid will ignite and achieve sustained burning when 
exposed to a test flame.  (ASTM D 92) 

 
1.1.13.  Maximum Allowable Quantity (MAQ) 
 
 
1.1.14.  UN Numbers 
 

The maximum quantity of flammable and combustible liquid permitted in a control area.  

UN number identifies and classifies hazardous substance and articles within the frame 
work of international transport.   

 
1.1.15.  Grounding 
 

The process of bonding one or more conductive objects to the ground, so that all objects 
are at zero(0) electrical potential.   

 
1.1.16.  High Hazard Level 2 Contents 
 

Contents that present deflagration hazard or a hazard from accelerated burning. for the 
purpose of this code, this includes, Class I, Class II or Class IIIA liquids that are used or 
stored in normally open containers or systems, or in closed containers or systems at gauge 
pressure of 15 psi (103 kPa) or greater.   

 
1.1.17.  High Hazard Level 3 Contents 
 

Contents that readily support combustion or that present a physical hazard. This includes, 
Class I, Class II or Class IIIA liquids that are used or stored in normally closed containers or 
in a closed systems at gauge pressure of less than 15 psi (103 kPa).   

 
1.1.18.  Refinery 
 

A plant in which flammable or combustible liquids are produced on a commercial scale 
from crude petroleum, natural gasoline or other hydrocarbon sources.  

 
1.1.19.  Solvent Distillation Unit 
 

An appliance that distills a flammable or combustible liquid to remove contaminants and 
recover the liquid.  

 
1.1.20.  Staging 
 

Temporary storage in a process area of liquids in containers, intermediate bulk containers 
and portable tanks.  

 
1.1.21.  Terminal 
 

That portion of a property where liquids are received by tank vessel, pipelines, tank car or 
tank vehicle and are stored or blended in bulk for the purpose of distributing such liquids 
by tank vessel, pipeline, tank car, tank vehicle, portable tank or container.  

 
1.1.22.  Control Area 
 

Area or building or portion of building within which flammable and combustible liquids 
are allowed to be stored, dispensed, used, handled in quantities, that do not exceed maxi-
mum allowable quantities (MAQ).  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 976 of 1348 

 

1.2. Liquids 

 
1.2.1.  Flammable Liquid  
 
 

Any liquid that has a closed-cup flash point below 100°F (37.8°C). 

1.2.1.1.  Class I Flammable Liquid 
 

Any liquid that has a closed-cup flash point below 100°F (37.8°C) and a reid 
vapor pressure not exceeding an absolute pressure of 40 psia (2068.6 mm Hg) 
at 100°F (37.8°C). 

 
1.2.1.2.  Class IA Flammable Liquid 
 

Liquids that have flash points below 73°F (22.8°C) and boiling points below 
100°F (37.8°C). Examples are Diethyl Ether, Ethylene Oxide, Light Crude Oils. 

 
1.2.1.3.  Class IB Flammable Liquid 
 

Liquids that have flash points below 73°F (22.8°C) and boiling points above 
100°F (37.8°C). Examples are Motor and Aviation Gasoline, Toluene, Lacquers, 
Lacquer Thinner. 

 
1.2.1.4.  Class IC Flammable Liquid 
 

Liquids that have flash points at or above 73°F (22.8°C) but below 100°F (37.8°
C). Examples are xylene, some paints, some solvent based Cements. 

 
1.2.2.  Combustible Liquid 
 
 

Any liquid that has a closed-cup flash point at or above 100°F (37.8°C).  

1.2.2.1.  Class II Combustible Liquid 
 

Any liquid that has a flash point at or above 100°F (37.8°C) and below 140°F 
(60°C). Examples are Diesel Fuel, Paint Thinner. 

1.2.2.2.  Class IIIA Combustible Liquid 
 

Any liquid that has a flash point at or above 140°F (60°C) and below 200°F (93°
C).  Examples are Home Heating Oil 

 

 

1.2.2.3.  Class IIIB Combustible Liquid 
 

Any liquid that has a flash point above 200°F (93°C).                                                                                 
Examples are Cooking Oils, Lubricating Oils, Motor Oils. 

 
1.2.3.  Hazardous Material or Chemical 
 

Material presenting dangers beyond the fire problems relating to flash point and boiling 
point. These hazards and dangers can arise from, but not limited to , toxicity, reactivity, 
instability or corrosivity. 

 
1.2.4.  Liquefied Gas 
 

A gas, other than in solution, that in a packaging under the charged pressure exists both 
as a liquid and a gas at a temperature of 20°C (68°F). 

 
 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 977 of 1348 

 

1.2. Liquids 

 
1.2.5.  Unstable Liquid 
 

A liquid that, in the pure state or as commercially produced or transported, will vigorously 
polymerize, decompose, undergo condensation reaction, or become self-reactive under 
conditions of shock, pressure, or temperature. 

 
1.2.6.  Water miscible Liquid 
 

A liquid that mixes in all proportions with water without the use of chemical additives, 
such as emulsifying agents. 

 
1.2.7.  Cryogenic Fluid  
 

A fluid with a boiling point lower than -130°F (-90°C) at an absolute pressure of 14.7 psi 
(101.325 kPa) 

 
1.2.8.  Crude Petroleum 
 

Hydrocarbon mixtures that have a flash point below 150°F (65.6°C) and that have not 
been processed in a refinery.  

 
1.2.9.  Liquid 
 

Any material                                                                                                                                                         
a. That has fluidity greater than that of 300 penetration asphalt when test in accordance 
with ASTM D 5 or                                                                                                                                                    
b. Is a viscous substance for which specific melting point cannot be determined but that is 
determined to be liquid in accordance with ASTM D 4359 

  
1.2.10.  Fast Moving Consumer Goods (FMCG) 
 

Retail products  that are consumed by the consumers on a day-to-day basis such as clean-
ing solvents, perfumes, paints etc.  

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 978 of 1348 

1.3. Storage 

 
1.3.1.  Storage Tank  
 

Any vessel having a liquid capacity that exceeds 230 L (60 gal), is intended for fixed instal-
lation, and is not used for processing. 

 
1.3.2.  Atmospheric Tank  
 

A storage tank that has been designed to operate at pressures from atmospheric through 
a gauge pressure of 6.9 kPa (1.0 psig) (i.e., 760 mm Hg through 812 mm Hg) measured at 
the top of the tank. 

 
1.3.3.  Low-Pressure Tank 
 

A storage tank designed to withstand an internal pressure above a gauge pressure of 6.9 
kPa (1.0 psig) but not more than 103.4 kPa (15 psig or 1 bar gauge) measured at the top 
of the tank. 

 
1.3.4.  Portable Tank 
 

Any closed vessel having a liquid capacity over 230 L (60 gal) and not intended for fixed 
installation.  

 
1.3.5.  Secondary Containment Tank 
 

A tank that has an inner and outer wall with an interstitial space (annulus) between the 
walls and that has a means for monitoring the interstitial space for a leak.  

 
1.3.6.  Aboveground Tank 
 
 
1.3.7.  Protected Aboveground Tank 
 

A tank that is installed above grade, at grade, or below grade without backfill. 

An atmospheric aboveground storage tank that is listed and approved with Standards for 
Protected Aboveground Tanks for Flammable and Combustible Liquids, or an equivalent 
test procedure that consists of a primary tank provided with protection from physical 
damage and fire-resistive protection from exposure to high intensity liquid pool fire. 

 
1.3.8.  Vault 
 

An enclosure consisting of four walls, a floor, and a top for the purpose of containing a 
liquid storage tank and not intended to be occupied by personnel other than for inspec-
tion, repair, or maintenance of the vault, the storage tank, or related equipment. 

 
1.3.9.  Container 
 
 
1.3.10.  Closed Container 
 

Any vessel of 450 L (119 gal) or less capacity used for transporting or storing liquids.  

A container as herein defined, so sealed by means of a lid or other device that neither 
liquid nor vapor will escape from it at ordinary temperatures. Closed container is not al-
lowed to have any vents, either automatic, fixed or pressure operated. 

 
 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 979 of 1348 

1.3. Storage 

1.3.11.  Safety Can 
 

A listed container, of not more than 20 L (5.3 gal) capacity, having a spring-closing lid and 
spout cover and so designed that it will safely relieve internal pressure when subjected to 
fire exposure. 

 
1.3.12.  Fire Resistant Aboveground Storage Tank  
 

An atmospheric aboveground storage tank with thermal insulation that has been evaluat-
ed for resistance to physical damage and for limiting the heat transferred to the primary 
tank when exposed to hydrocarbon fuel fire. It is listed in accordance with UL 2080. 

 
1.3.13.  Floating Roof Tank  
 

Floating roof tank incorporates any of the following.                                                                                  
a. A closed-top pontoon or double-deck metal floating roof in an open-top tank construct-
ed in accordance with API Standard 650, Welded Steel Tanks for Oil Storage.                                           
b. A fixed metal roof with ventilation at the top and roof eaves constructed in accordance 
with API 650 and containing a closed-top pontoon or double-deck metal floating roof 
meeting the requirements of API 650.                                                                                                             
c. A fixed metal roof with ventilation at the top and roof eaves constructed in accordance 
with API 650 and containing a metal floating cover supported by liquidtight metal floating 
devices that provide sufficient buoyancy to prevent the liquid surface from being exposed 
when half of the flotation is lost 

1.3.14.  Pressure Vessel 
 

A container or other component designed in accordance with the ASME Boiler and Pres-
sure Vessel Code. 

 
1.3.15.  Bulk Storage Tank 
 

The term bulk storage applies to following liquids storage arrangements.                                   
a. The storage of flammable / combustible liquid in fixed tanks that exceeds 60 gallons. 
(230 L) capacity.                                                                                                                                                   
b. The storage of flammable and combustible liquids in portable tank that exceeds 660 
gallons (2500 L) capacity.                                                                                                                                                           
c. The storage of flammable and combustible liquids in intermediate bulk containers that 
exceeds 793 gallons (3000 L) capacity. 

 
1.3.16.  Intermediate Bulk Container 
 

Any closed vessel having a liquid capacity not exceeding 793 gal (3000 L) and intended for 
storing and transporting liquids.                                    

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 980 of 1348 

1.3. Storage 

 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 981 of 1348 

1.4. Fuel Dispensing 

 
1.4.1.  Motor Fuel Dispensing Facility (Gas Station)  
 

That portion of a property where motor fuels are stored and dispensed from fixed equip-
ment into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles or marine craft or into approved containers, 
including all equipment used in connection therewith. In UAE, these facilities are generally 
accompanied by retail units, restaurants and service stations. See Chapter 1. Table 
1.1.18., for further definition. 

 
1.4.2.  Fleet Vehicle Fuel Dispensing Facility   
 

A motor fuel dispensing facility at a commercial, industrial, governmental, or manufactur-
ing property where motor fuels are dispensed into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles that 
are used in connection with the business or operation of that property by persons within 
the employ of such business or operation. 

 
1.4.3.  Marine Motor Fuel Dispensing Facility  
 

A motor fuel dispensing facility at or adjacent to shore, a pier, a wharf, or a floating dock 
where motor fuels are dispensed into the fuel tanks of marine craft. 

 
1.4.4.  Major Repair Garage  
 

A building or portions of a building where major repairs, such as engine overhauls, 
painting, body and fender work, and repairs that require draining of the motor vehicle 
fuel tank are performed on motor vehicles, including associated floor space used for offic-
es, parking, or showrooms. 

 
1.4.5.  Minor Repair Garage (Service Station) 
 

A building or portions of a building used for lubrication, inspection, and minor automotive 
maintenance work, such as engine tune-ups, replacement of parts, fluid changes (e.g., oil, 
antifreeze, transmission fluid, brake fluid, air conditioning refrigerants, etc.), brake system 
repairs, tire rotation, and similar routine maintenance work, including associated floor 
space used for offices, parking, or showrooms. 

 
1.4.6.  Dispensing Device 
 

A dispensing device that consists of one or more individual units intended for installation 
in conjunction with each other, mounted above a dispensing area typically within the gas 
station canopy structure and characterized by the use of an overhead hose reel. 

 
1.4.7.  Dispensing Device, Overhead Type  
 

A dispensing device that consists of one or more hose outlets with nozzles, known as mul-
ti-product dispensers, mounted on the dispensing equipment, usually located under a 
canopy. 

 
1.4.8.  Vapor Processing Equipment  
 

Those components of a vapor processing system that are designed to process vapors or 
liquids captured during transfer or filling operations. 

 

 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 982 of 1348 

2.  Flammable and Combustible Liquids 

 

2.1.  The Flash Point and the Risks 

2.1.1. 

 
2.1.2. 

 

2.1.3. 

2.1.4. 

Flash point measurements are made using several different test methods but com-
mon operation. The liquid being tested is placed in a small sample cup and heated 
to a certain temperature. A small pilot flame is introduced into the cup, and the 
operator observes if vapors in the cup ignites. If the vapor does not ignite, the liq-
uid is heated further, incrementally and the pilot flame is reintroduced. These 
steps are repeated until ignition occurs and 
temperature of the liquid at ignition marks 
its ‘Flash Point’. 

Did You Know? 

The storage, processing, handling and use of 
liquids at temperatures above flash point 
can produce ignitable vapours, causing fire 
and explosion accidents.  

The measure of                     
flammability of any               
liquid depends on its                 
‘Flash Point’. 

At high altitudes, the  
actual flash points will 
be significantly lower 
than those observed at 
sea level or corrected to 
atmospheric pressure at 
sea level. 

The risk involved in storage, usage and han-
dling of flammable and combustible liquids 
shall be evaluated based on the following 
principles.                                                                        
a. Analysis of fire and explosion hazards of 
the operation.                                                               
b. Analysis of emergency relief from process 
vessels, taking into consideration the prop-
erties of the materials used and the fire pro-
tection and control measures taken.                             
c. Analysis of applicable facility design re-
quirements (Separation distances, fire 
ratings etc.)                                                                                                                                                      
d. Analysis of requirements for liquid han-
dling, transfer and use.                                                                                                                              
e. Analysis of local conditions such as exposure to and from adjacent properties 
and exposure to floods, earthquakes and windstorms.                                                                       
f. Analysis of the emergency response capabilities of the in-house emergency ser-
vices and Civil Defence specialization. 
 
As a general guideline, this chapter provides the requirements related to storage, 
handling, transfer, dispensing and usage of flammable and combustible liquids.  
This chapter shall be read and refereed in conjunction with other chapters of this 
code where referred. 

Allowance could be  
necessary for this       
difference for                      
appropriate assessment 
of risk. 

 
2.1.5.  NFPA 30, NFPA 30A, NFPA 30 Handbook, EPA, Dubai Municipality Hazardous Ma-

terial guidelines have been referred for this chapter. Consultants, contractors, 
owners and House of Expertise shall refer to these documents for further details, 
requirements, specifications and design considerations. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 983 of 13482.2.  Applicability of this chapter 

2.2.1.  Requirements of this chapter shall not apply to the following                                                

a. Any liquid that have melting point at or above 38°C.                                                          

b. The material which are not ‘liquid’ as defined in 1.2.17.                                                       

c. Any Cryogenic fluid or liquefied gas.                                                                                                

d. Any liquid that does not have flash point but which is capable of burning in cer-

tain condition.                                                                                                                                

e. Any aerosol product.                                                                                                                       

f. Any mist, spray or foam.                                                                                                            

g. Transportation of flammable and combustible liquids.                                                         

h. Storage, handling and use of fuel oil tanks and containers connected with oil-

burning equipment. 

 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 984 of 1348 

2.3.  General Requirements for Flammable and Combustible             

Liquid Storage 

2.3.1. 

The general requirements for storage of Flammable and Combustible Liquids shall 
comply with Table 13.1. These requirements shall apply to all the flammable and 
combustible liquids storage, usage, handling and dispensing, and shall be complied 
along with requirements of all the following sections of this chapter. 

Table 13.1: General Requirements for Flammable and Combustible Liquid Storage 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  CONTROL OF   

i. 

IGNITION 

SOURCE    

 

 

Precautions shall be taken to prevent the ignition of flammable vapors from 
sources such as the following                                                                                                     
a. Open flames                                                                                                                               
b. Lightning                                                                                                                                      
c. Hot surfaces                                                                                                                               
d. Radiant heat                                                                                                                                  
e.  Smoking                                                                                                                                    
f.  Cutting and welding                                                                                                                   
g. Spontaneous ignition                                                                                                                 
h. Frictional heat or sparks                                                                                                          
i. Static electricity                                                                                                                        
j. Electrical sparks                                                                                                                          
k. Stray currents                                                                                                                                 
l. Ovens, furnaces, and heating equipment                                                                                 
m. Hot Work                                                                         

2. GENERAL 

Inside liquid storage rooms shall not exceed 46 m2 . 
Class I liquids shall not be permitted in basement areas.  

i. 
ii. 
iii.  The storage of any liquids shall not physically obstruct means of egress. 
iv.  Wood at least 25 mm nominal thickness shall be permitted to be used for shelv-

ing, racks, dunnage, scuffboards, floor overlay, and similar installations. 

v.  Where storage is on racks, a minimum 1.2 m wide aisle shall be provided be-
tween adjacent rack sections and any adjacent storage of liquids. Main aisles 
shall be a minimum of 2.4 m wide. 

vi.  Solid pile and palletized storage in liquid warehouses shall be arranged so that 
piles are separated from each other by at least 1.2 m. Aisles shall be provided 
and arranged so that no container or portable tank is more than 6 m from an 
aisle. Main aisles shall be a minimum of 2.4 m wide. 

3. WARNING 

i. 

SIGNS 

Adequate Warning Signs shall be provided where flammable and combustible 
liquids are stored, used, handled or dispensed, such as “NO SMOKING”, 
“FLAMMABLE LIQUID, KEEP AWAY”, “NO OPEN FLAMES” etc. 

 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 985 of 1348 

Table 13.1: General Requirements for Flammable and Combustible Liquid Storage 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

i. 
4.  ELECTRICAL               

AREA                          

Electrical Area Classification shall comply with NFPA 70 Class I designated 
areas with Table 13.1.a., for Class I liquid storage areas and areas where Class 
II OR Class III liquids are stored or handled at or above their flash points. 

CLASSIFICATION 

 

ii.  A classified area shall not extend beyond a floor, wall, roof or other solid par-

tition that  has no openings within the classified area. See Figure 13.1. and 
13.2. 

LOCATION 

DIVISION  ZONE 

EXTENT OF CLASSIFIED AREA 

Table 13.1.a.: Electrical Area Classification 

1.  INDOOR EQUIPMENT- 

1 

0 

WHERE  FLAMMABLE   

VAPOUR-AIR MIXTURE 

CAN EXIST UNDER      

NORMAL CONDITION 

 

 

1 

2 

1 

2 

2.  OUTDOOR EQUIPMENT- 

1 

0 

The entire area associated with such equipment 
where flammable gases or vapours are present 
continuously for long period of time. 

Area within 1.5 m of any edge of such equipment, 
extending in all direction 

Area between 1.5 m and 2.5 m of any edge of 
such equipment, extending in all directions in-
cluding space up to 1 m above floor or grade level 
within 1.5 m to 7.6 m horizontally from any edge 
of such equipment 

The entire area associated with such equipment 
where flammable gases or vapours are present 
continuously for long period of time. 

WHERE  FLAMMABLE   

VAPOUR-AIR MIXTURE 

CAN EXIST UNDER        

NORMAL CONDITION 

 

 

1 

2 

3.  INDOOR– TANK STORAGE 

1 

INSTALLATIONS INSIDE 

BUILDINGS 

2 

 

 

1 

2 

1 

2 

Area within 1 m of any edge of such equipment, 
extending in all direction 

Area between 1 m and 2.5 m of any edge of such 
equipment, extending in all directions including 
space up to 1 m above floor or grade level within 
1 m to 3 m horizontally from any edge of such 
equipment 

All equipment located below grade level. 

Any equipment located at or above grade level. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 986 of 1348 

 

 

Figure 13.1.: Extent of Classified Area– Classified Area blocked by wall 

Figure 13.2.: Extent of Classified Area– Classified Area extends through wall opening 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 987 of 1348 

 

LOCATION 

DIVISION  ZONE 

EXTENT OF CLASSIFIED AREA 

Table 13.1.a.: Electrical Area Classification 

4.  TANK—ABOVEGROUND, 

1 

FIXED ROOF 

1 

 

 

0 

1 

Inside fixed roof tank 

i. 
ii.  Area inside of vent piping or vent opening. 

i. 

Area inside dike where dike height is greater 
than the distance from the tank to the dike 
for more than 50% of the tank circumfer-
ence.  

ii.  Within 1.5 m of open end of vent, extending 

in all directions. 

2 

2 

i.  within 3 m from shell, ends, or roof of the 

tank, including area inside dike up to top of 
the dike wall. 

ii.  Area between 1.5 m and 3 m from open end 

of vent, extending in all directions. 

Area between the floating the floating and fixed 
roof sections and within the shell. 

Area above the floating roof and within the shell. 

Entire interior volume, if Class I Liquids are stored 
within. 

Any pit, box or space below grade level, if any 
part is within a Division 1 or 2 or Zone 1 or 2 clas-
sification location. 

Up to 0.5 m above grade level within a horizontal 
radius of 3 m from a loose fill connection and 
within a horizontal radius of 3 m from loose fill 
connection and within a horizontal radius of 1.5 
m from a tight fill connection. 

Area inside the drum or container 

Within 1 m of the open end of vent, extending in 
all directions 

Area between 1 m and 1.5 m of open end of vent, 
extending in all directions. 

0 

1 

1 

1 

2 

0 

1 

2 

5.  TANK—ABOVEGROUND, 

1 

FLOATING ROOF WITH 

FIXED OUTER ROOF 

6.  TANK—ABOVEGROUND, 

1 

FLOATING ROOF WITH 

FIXED NO OUTER ROOF 

7.  TANK VAULT—INTERIOR 

1 

8.  UNDERGROUND TANK 

1 

FILL OPENING 

 

2 

9.  VENT-DISCHARGING          

1 

UPWARDS 

1 

2 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 988 of 1348 

 

LOCATION 

DIVISION  ZONE 

EXTENT OF CLASSIFIED AREA 

Table 13.1.a.: Electrical Area Classification 

0 

1 

2 

2 

2 

1 

2 

2 

2 

 

Area inside the drum or container. 

Within 1 m of vent and fill openings, extending in 
all directions. 

Area between 1 m and 1.5 m from vent or fill 
opening, extending in all directions, up to 0.5 m 
above floor or grade level within a horizontal radi-
us of 3 m from vent or fill opening. 

Within 1.5 m of any edge of such devices, extend-
ing in all directions, including up to 1 m above 
floor or grade level within 7.6 m horizontally from 
any edge of such devices. 

Within 1 m of any edge of such devices, extending 
in all directions, including up to 0.5 m above floor 
or grade level within 3 m horizontally from any 
edge of such devices. 

Entire area within a pit or sump if any part is with-
in  Division 1 or 2 or Zone 1 or 2 classified loca-
tion. 

Entire area within a pit or sump if any part is with-
in  Division 1 or 2 or Zone 1 or 2 classified loca-
tion. 

Entire pit or sump 

Area up to 0.5 m above ditch, separator or basin, 
including area up to 0.5 m above grade within 4.5 
m horizontally from any edge 

SAME AS PITS AND SUMPS 

9.  DRUM AND CONTAINER 

1 

FILLING– OUTDOOR OR 

INDOOR 

 

 

1 

2 

10.  INDOOR-PUMPS, BLEED-

2 

ERS, WITHDRAWAL FIT-

TINGS 

11.  OUTDOOR-PUMPS, 

2 

BLEEDERS, WITHDRAWAL 

FITTINGS 

12.  PITS AND SUMPS- WITH-

1 

OUT MECHANICAL VEN-

TILATION 

13.  PITS AND SUMPS- WITH 

2 

ADEQUATE MECHANICAL 

VENTILATION 

14.  PITS AND SUMPS-

2 

CONTAINING VALVES, 

FITTINGS OR PIPING AND 

NOT WITHIN A DIVISION 

1 OR 2 OR ZONE 1 OR 2 

CLASSIFIED LOCATION 

15.  OUTDOOR-DRAINAGE 

2 

DITCHES, SEPARATORS, 

IMPOUNDING BASINS 

16.  INDOOR-DRAINAGE 

 

DITCHES, SEPARATORS, 

IMPOUNDING BASINS 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 989 of 1348 

 

LOCATION 

DIVISION  ZONE 

EXTENT OF CLASSIFIED AREA 

Table 13.1.a.: Electrical Area Classification 

Area inside of tank. 

Within 1 m of edge of dome, extending in all di-
rections 

Area between 1 m and 4.5 m from edge of dome, 
extending in all directions. 

Area inside of tank. 

Within 1 m of point of venting to atmosphere, 
extending in all directions 

Area between 1 m and 4.5 m from point of 
venting to atmosphere, extending in all direc-
tions, including 0.5 m above grade within a hori-
zontal radius of 3 m from point of loading connec-
tion. 

Within 1 m of open end of vent, extending in all 
directions 

17.  TANK VEHICLE AND 

1 

TANK CAR– LOADING 

THROUGH OPEN DOME 

 

 

18.  TANK VEHICLE AND 

TANK CAR– LOADING 

THROUGH BOTTOM 

CONNECTIONS WITH  

ATMOSPHERIC VENTING 

 

 

1 

2 

1 

1 

2 

0 

1 

2 

0 

1 

2 

19.  TANK VEHICLE AND 

1 

1 

TANK CAR– LOADING 

THROUGH CLOSED DOME 

WITH  ATMOSPHERIC 

VENTING 

 

20.  TANK VEHICLE AND 

TANK CARE– LOADING 

THROUGH CLOSED DOME 

WITH  VAPOUR CONTROL 

2 

2 

2 

2 

Area between 1 m and 4.5 m from open end of 
vent, extending in all directions. 

Within 1 m of point of connections, of both fill 
and vapour lines, extending in all directions. 

21.  TANK VEHICLE AND 

2 

2 

TANK CAR– BOTTOM 

LOADING  WITH VAPOUR 

CONTROL OR ANY BOT-

TOM UNLOADING 

 

Within 1 m of point of connections, extending in 
all directions, including 0.5 m above grade within 
horizontal radius of 3 m from point of connec-
tions. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 990 of 1348 

 

LOCATION 

DIVISION  ZONE 

EXTENT OF CLASSIFIED AREA 

Table 13.1.a.: Electrical Area Classification 

22.  STORAGE AND REPAIR 

1 

GARAGE FOR TANK     

VEHICLES 

 

 

2 

2 

1 

2 

2 

23.  GARAGE FOR OTHER 

Ordinary  Ordinary 

THAN TANK VEHICLES 

All pits or spaces below floor level. 

Area up to 0.5 m above floor or grade level for 
entire storage or repair garage. 

Area between 1 m and 4.5 m from edge of dome, 
extending in all directions. 

If there is any opening to these rooms within the 
extent of an outdoor classified location, the entire 
room shall be classified the same as the area clas-
sification at the point of the opening. 

24.  OUTDOOR DRUM              

Ordinary  Ordinary  Within 1 m of point of venting to atmosphere, 

STORAGE 

extending in all directions 

25.  INSIDE ROOMS OR STOR-

2 

2 

Entire room or locker. 

AGE LOCKERS USED FOR 

THE STORAGE OF CLASS I 

LIQUIDS 

26.  INDOOR WAREHOUSING 

Ordinary  Ordinary 

WHERE THERE IS NO 

FLAMMABLE LIQUID 

TRANSFER 

27.  OFFICE AND REST ROOM  Ordinary  Ordinary 

If there is any opening to these rooms within the 
extent of an indoor classified location, the classi-
fied location shall extend through the opening to 
the same extent as if the wall, curb or partition 
did not exist. 

If there is any opening to these rooms within the 
extent of an indoor classified location, the room 
shall be classified the same as if the wall, curb or 
partition did not exist. 

28.  PIERS AND WHARVES 

 

 

See figure 13.5. 

29.  TANK VEHICLE AND 

2 

2 

TANK CAR– BOTTOM 

LOADING  WITH VAPOUR 

CONTROL OR ANY BOT-

TOM UNLOADING 

Within 1 m of point of connections, extending in 
all directions, including 0.5 m above grade within 
horizontal radius of 3 m from point of connec-
tions. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 991 of 1348 

 

 

Figure 13.3.: Area Classification of any Aboveground Tank– Division System 

Figure 13.4.: Area Classification of any Aboveground Tank– Zone System 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 992 of 1348 

 

 

Figure 13.5.: Area Classification of Marine Terminal 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 993 of 1348 

 

Table 13.1: General Requirements for Flammable and Combustible Liquid Storage 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

5.  ELECTRICAL  

i. 

INSTALLATIONS 

IN CLASSIFIED 

AREAS 

ii. 

Electrical Area Classification shall not be required for indoor liquid storage 
where all containers, intermediate bulk containers and portable tanks are 
sealed and are not opened. 
Electrical area classification shall not be required for dispensing of quantities 
that do not exceed 0.5 L including but not limited to tinting of paints and 
coatings. 

iii.  For liquid storage rooms that are totally enclosed within the building, electri-
cal wiring and utilization equipment for Class I Liquid and Class II, Class III liq-
uids heated at or above their flash points, shall be Class I, Division 2 (Zone 2). 
iv.  For liquid storage rooms that are totally enclosed within the building, electri-

v. 

i. 

ii. 

cal wiring and utilization equipment for Class II and Class III Liquid storage 
shall be suitable for ordinary purpose. 
Class I, Division 1 electrical equipment and wiring must be used in the imme-
diate vicinity of any points where ignitable vapor releases are expected, such 
as areas involving transfer operations.  

The design, fabrication, assembly, test and inspection of piping systems shall 
be suitable for working pressures and structural stresses to be encountered 
by the piping systems. 
Liquid piping material, valves, faucets, couplings, flexible connectors, fittings 
and other pressure containing parts shall comply with ASME B31, Code for 
pressure Piping. 

6. PIPING 

iii.  Piping system shall be maintained liquidtight. 
iv. 

Low melting point materials such as aluminum, copper, brass, plastics or non-
ductile materials such as cast iron shall be permitted to be used underground 
within pressure and temperature limitations of ASME B31. 
Piping material shall be compatible with the liquids being handled. 
Joints shall be designed and installed in liquidtight manner by welded, 
flanged, threaded or mechanical attachment methods.  

v. 
vi. 

vii.  Class I liquid joint systems are recommended to be welded at all locations. 
viii.  Flexible connectors shall be listed and approved in accordance with interna-

tional test standards. 

ix.  Pipe joints dependent upon the friction characteristics of combustible materi-

x. 

xi. 

als for mechanical continuity or liquidtightness of piping shall only be used 
outside of buildings and aboveground. 
Piping systems shall be supported and protected against physical damage and 
stresses arising from settlement, vibration, expansion or contraction. 
Load bearing piping supports located in high fire exposure risk shall be pro-
tected by fire resistive construction, fire resistant protective coatings or wa-
ter spray systems etc. in accordance with API 2218, Fireproofing Practices in 
Petroleum and Petrochemical Processing Plants. 

xii.  Aboveground piping shall be protected with corrosion coatings. 
xiii.  Underground piping shall be protected for corrosion with coatings and Ca-

thodic protection. 

xiv.  Installation and Testing of Piping shall comply with NFPA 30, NFPA 30A and 

ASME B31. 

7. VENTILATION 

i. 

Ventilation for the rooms storing flammable and combustible materials shall 
be in accordance with Chapter 10, Section 2.20. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 994 of 1348 

Table 13.1: General Requirements for Flammable and Combustible Liquid Storage 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

8.  SPILL              

i. 

CONTAINMENT 

AND DRAINAGE 

ii. 

The containment, drainage and spill control requirements apply to the stor-
age of liquids in containers greater than 10 Gal. (38L) stored in rooms and 
warehouses. 
Storage areas shall be designed and operated to prevent the discharge of 
liquids to public waterways, public sewers, adjoining property or public 
ways. 

iii.  Spill containment shall be achieved by any of the following. a. Noncombus-

tible, liquid-tight raised sills, curbs or ramps of suitable height at exterior 
openings. b.  Noncombustible, liquid-tight raised sills, curbs or ramps of suit-
able height, or other flow-diverting structures at interior openings. c. Sloped 
floors d. Open grate trenches for floor drains that are connected to a 
properly designed drainage system. e. Wall scuppers that discharge to a safe 
location or to a properly designed drainage system.  

iv.  Spill control must be sized for the largest credible spill. 
v. 

The spill and drainage containment system shall be so provided that it is 
graded away from the fire compartment wall, other structural members, 
nearby hazards and property line. 

vi.  Emergency management procedure and emergency action plans shall ad-

dress proper collection and disposal of spills/drains.  

 

Figure 13.6.: Drain Arrangements 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 995 of 1348 

Table 13.1: General Requirements for Flammable and Combustible Liquid Storage 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

i.  Only incidental liquid storage are permitted to be stored in the basements with 

quantity restricted as indicated  in Table 13.2.6., Table 13.2.7., and Table 13.2.8. 

ii.  Flammable liquid storage room OR liquid warehouse are not permitted to be in 

basements. 

iii.  Dispensing OR processing of liquids are not permitted in basement. 
iv.  Class I liquids shall not be stored, used, dispensed in basements. 
v.  Liquids must not be stored more than two levels below grade. 

i.  All incompatible liquid as identified in their MSDS must be separated in accordance 

with Table 13.1.b., Table 13.1.c., Separation of Incompatible Liquids and Figure 
13.7. Where Table 13.1.b. contradicts with separation and compartmentation re-
quirements of Other Sections of this chapter, more stringent requirement shall 
apply. 

ii.  The spill containment and drain arrangement shall be separate for incompatible 

liquids. 

iii.  Water reactive materials must be identified and stored in separate compartment. 

They must be protected by suitable alternative fire protection system. 

9.  STORAGES 

IN                    

BASEMENT 

10.  SEPARA-

TION OF 

INCOM-

PATIBLE      

LIQUIDS 

 

DANGEROUS GOODS 

UN CLASS 

REQUIREMENTS 

Table 13.1.b.: Separation of Incompatible Liquids 

1. EXPLOSIVES 

2. FLAMMABLE GASES 

3.  NON-FLAMMABLE AND          

NON-TOXIC GASES 

4. TOXIC GASES 

5.  FLAMMABLE SOLIDS 

6.  SUBSTANCE LIABLE TO SPON-

TANEOUS COMBUSTION 

1.1. 

2.1 

2.2 

2.3 

4.1 

4.2 

Must not be stored in the same room.  

Must be separated by at least 5 meters.  

Must be separated by at least 5 meters.  

Must not be stored in the same room.  

Must be separated by at least 5 meters.  

Must be separated by at least 5 meters.  

7.  SUBSTANCE WHICH IN CON-

4.3 

TACT WITH  WATER, EMITS              
FLAMMABLE GAS 

Must not be stored in the same room. It must be in 
separate room protected by alternative fire protection 
system.  

8.  OXIDIZING SUBSTANCES 

9. ORGANIC PEROXIDES 

10. TOXIC SUBSTANCES 

11.  INFECTIOUS  SUBSTANCES 

12. RADIOACTIVE MATERIALS 

13. CORROSIVE SUBSTANCES 

5.1 

5.2 

6.1 

6.2 

7 

8 

Must not be stored in the same room.  

Must not be stored in the same room.  

Must be separated by at least 5 meters.  

Special approval from various authorities is required. 

Special approval from various authorities is required. 

Must be separated by at least 5 meters.  

14. MISCELLANEOUS HAZARDOUS   9 

Must be separated by at least 3 meters.  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 996 of 1348 

Table 13.1.c.: Separation of Incompatible Liquids 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 997 of 1348 

 

 

Figure 13.7.: Separation of Incompatible Liquids 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 998 of 1348 

Table 13.1: General Requirements for Flammable and Combustible Liquid Storage 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

11.  DISPENSING, 

HANDLING, 

TRANSFER  

AND USE OF 

FLAMMABLE 

AND             

COMBUS-

TIBLE LIQUIDS 

1. GENERAL 
 
i.  All flammable liquids and combustible liquids shall be kept in their approved 

closed containers or tanks when not actually in use. 

ii.  Class I liquids shall not be used or handled outside closed systems, where there 

are open flames or other ignition sources within classified area. 

iii.  Processing vessels and buildings containing such processing vessels shall be 

located so that a fire involving the vessels does not constitute an exposure haz-
ard to other occupancies. 

iv.  Processing equipment, in which unstable liquids are handled shall be separated 

from unrelated plant facilities that use or handle flammable and combustible  
liquids shall be separated by 7.6 m clear spacing OR 2 hour fire resistance rated, 
explosion protection wall. 

 
2. CONSTRUCTION 
 
i.  All buildings or structures used for flammable liquids and combustible liquids 

handling, usage and dispensing shall be separated from adjacent property and 
public street or public way in accordance with Table 13.1.c. 

 
3. OPERATION  
 
i.  The vessels, containers, tanks and piping systems shall be designed for pressur-

ized transfer and shall be capable of withstanding the anticipated operating 
pressure. 

ii.  Safety and operating controls, including pressure-relief devices, shall be provid-

ed to prevent overpressure of any part of the system. 
iii.  Only inert gas shall be used to transfer Class I liquids. 
iv.  Only inert gas shall be used to transfer Class II and Class III liquids that are heat-

ed above their flash points. 

v.  Positive displacement pumps shall be provided with pressure relief that dis-
charges back to the tank, pump suction or other suitable location or shall be 
provided with interlocks to prevent overpressure. 

vi.  Piping, valves, fittings, hose, nozzles, flexible connectors, devices and equip-

ment shall be Listed and approved by International Civil Defence approved la-
boratories. 

vii.  If hose is used in the transfer operation, it shall be equipped with self closing 

valve without a hold-open latch in addition to the outlet valve. 

viii. Class I, Class II or Class III liquids used in a process and staged in the process 

area, shall not be filled in the process area. 

 

Table 13.1.c.: Minimum Separation Distances of Buildings using Flammable and Combustible Liquids 

LIQUID CLASS 

TO ADJACENT         

TO STREET OR          

CONSTRUCTION TYPE 

PROPERTY LINE 

PUBLICWAY 

1.  CLASS I, UNSTABLE       

7.6 m 

LIQUID OF ANY CLASS 

 

2. CLASS II 

3. CLASS III 

 

3 m 

3 m 

3 m 

3 m 

1.5 m 

1.5 m 

1.5 m 

TYPE II (111) 

TYPE II (222) 

TYPE II (111) 

TYPE II (111) 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 999 of 1348 

Table 13.1: General Requirements for Flammable and Combustible Liquid Storage 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

ix.   If the mixing/blending vessel is capable of creating static electricity, they 

shall be bonded  and earthed to a static grounding system. 

X.   All mixing / blending vessels shall be provided with self closing non com-
bustible lid that are liquid tight and capable of containing fire within the 
vessel. 

Xi.   Ventilation system shall be provided. 
 
4. MAXIMUM QUANTITY ALLOWED FOR INCIDENTAL OPERATIONS INSIDE 
 
i.  The quantity of liquids allowed for incidental operation shall be limited to 

amount required to supply one continuous  24-hour period of incidental 
operation, subject to following conditions.                                                                     
a. The storage of such permitted liquid shall be stored in accordance with 
Table 13.2.                                                                                                                              
b. Class I liquid, maximum allowed quantity is 25 Gal. (95 L)                                      
c. Class II liquid, maximum allowed quantity is 660 Gal (2500 L). 

i.  The staging of liquid in dispensing or transfer area shall be limited to the 

following.                                                                                                                      
a. The containers that are in use.                                                                              
b. Containers that are filled within a working shift.                                               
c. The container consisting of liquids that are consumed within 24 hours of 
operation.                                                                                                                      
d. The containers that are permitted else where in this code. 

ii.  Staging area shall be minimum 3 m away from the dispensing OR transfer 

area.  

iii.  Following  additional precaution shall be taken for Class I liquids.                    

a. They shall be kept in closed tank when not in use.                                             
b. They shall not be transferred into containers unless the nozzle and con-
tainer are electrically interconnected.                                                                     
c. Automatic container filling operation shall be designed to prevent static 
electricity. 

 

i.  Storage, use, handling and dispensing of cryogenics liquids, unstable liq-

uids shall need fire risk assessment based on the MSDS, process hazards, 
operation hazards and international standards including but not limited to 
NFPA 30, IFC and IBC. 

ii.  Operations and processes where flammable and combustible liquids are 

subjected to higher temperature atmospheres than their flash points such 
as, but not limited to Heat transfer systems, Boiler systems, vaporizer sys-
tems, vapor recovery and processing systems, burner systems, High pres-
sure systems, distillation systems etc., shall be submitted to Civil Defence 
with detailed fire and explosion risk assessment with supporting docu-
ments, analysis and schematics for approval, based on international stand-
ards and process safety manuals. 

11.  DISPENSING, HAN-

DLING, TRANSFER  

AND USE OF              

FLAMMABLE AND             

COMBUSTIBLE           

LIQUIDS 

12.  STAGING OF         

LIQUIDS 

13.  FIRE RISK             

ASSESSMENT      

REQUIREMENT 

FOR CIVIL  DE-

FENCE              AP-

PROVAL 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1000 of 1348 

  Table 13.1: General Requirements for Flammable and Combustible Liquid Storage 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

14. TRUCKS,   

i.  The permission of usage of industrial trucks in hazardous and classified locations 

FORKLIFTS 

AND OTHER 

TRANSPOR-

TATION            

VEHICLES  

for handling flammable and combustible liquids shall be as per  Table 13.1.d., 
Where                                                                                                                                      
a. CN-Compressed natural gas powered vehicle                                                                               
b. CNS-CN vehicle with added safety for exhaust/fuel/electrical systems                    
c. D– A diesel powered vehicle                                                                                          
d. DS– D vehicle with added safety for exhaust/fuel/electrical systems                    
e. DX– D vehicle designed for specific flammable vapors/dusts/fibers                       
f. DY– DS vehicle with electrical equipment enclosed, temperature limitation                                                                                                                      
g. E-Electrically powered vehicle                                                                                      
h. ES–E vehicle with spark prevention and temperature limitation feature                  
i. EE– ES vehicle with all its motors and electrical equipment enclosed                      
j. EX– E vehicle, designed for specific flammable vapors/dusts/fibers                             
k. G– A gasoline powered vehicle                                                                                              
l. GS-A gasoline vehicle, designed for specific flammable vapors/dusts/fibers                     
m. G/CN– A vehicle that operates on either Gasoline or compressed natural gas  
n. GS/CNS– G/CN vehicle with added safety for exhaust/fuel/electrical systems 0. 
LP– LP Gas powered vehicle                                                                                              
p. LPS—LP vehicle with added safety for exhaust/fuel/electrical systems                   
q. GS/LPS– Vehicle that operates on either Gasoline or LP Gas, with added safety 
for exhaust/fuel/electrical systems  

ii.  The table is derived from NFPA 505. The J and K referred in the table for Civil De-
fence approval shall be as per vehicle manufacturer’s specifications and test certi-
fication as per UL 558, Standard for Safety Industrial Trucks, internal combus-
tion Engine powered and UL 583, Standard for Safety Electric– Battery powered 
Trucks. 

Table 13.1.d.: Use of Powered Trucks handling Flammable and Combustible Liquids 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1001 of 1348 

 

Table 13.1: General Requirements for Flammable and Combustible Liquid Storage 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

15. OTHER             

i.  Other requirements for flammable and combustible liquids such as but not 

REQUIREMENTS  

limited to, Emergency venting of Above ground liquid storage tanks, Pro-
cesses facilities and specific operations facilities using flammable and com-
bustible liquids, Explosion protection, Emission mitigation etc. shall be as per 
NFPA 30, NFPA 30A, IFC, API and relevant international codes and stand-
ards. 
Fire Detection and Alarm System shall be provided for all the enclosed spac-
es and shall be in accordance with Chapter 8. Fire Detection and Alarm Sys-
tem. 

ii. 

iii.  All facilities storing aboveground flammable and combustible liquids, either 

indoor or outdoor, shall be provided with Automatic Fire Protection sys-
tems. Selection and design criteria of such Fire Protection System shall be in 
accordance with relevant tables of Chapter 9. Fire Protection Systems. 

iv.  All facilities storing flammable and combustible liquids shall have required 

means of egress, travel distances, dead ends and commonpath in accord-
ance with High Hazard occupancy requirements and shall comply with    
Chapter 3. Means of Egress. 
Fire extinguishers shall be provided throughout facilities soring flammable 
and combustible liquids in accordance with Chapter 4. Fire Extinguishers. 

v. 

vi.  Adequate Hazard identification signs, Electrical Classification signs, signs for 

Health effects of hazardous materials shall be provided at all facilities stor-
ing, handling an dispensing flammable and combustible liquids. Exit Signs 
shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 5. Exit Signs. 

vii.  Emergency Lighting shall be provided for facilities storing flammable and 

combustible liquids and shall comply with Chapter 6. Emergency Lighting. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1002 of 1348 

2.4.  Indoor Storage of Liquids in Containers 

2.4.1. 

 
2.4.2. 

 
2.4.3. 

The storage of Flammable and Combustible Liquids in containers, at indoor loca-
tions (In Rooms) shall comply with the Table 13.1. General Requirements and   
Table 13.2. Indoor Storage of Liquids in Containers. 

The containers referred for storage of Flammable and Combustible Liquids in this 
section apply to 4 distinct size limitations.                                                                                        
a. Drums and other containers that do not exceed 119 Gallons. (450 L) capacity.                                                     
b. Portable tank that do not exceed 660 Gallons. (2500 L) capacity.                                                                            
c. Intermediate Bulk Containers that do not exceed 793 Gallons (3000 L) capacity. 
d. Overpack drums used for temporary containment of containers not exceeding 
60 Gallons (230 L) capacity. 

Table 13.2. shall not apply to                                                                                                               
a. Containers, intermediate bulk containers and portable tanks that are used in 
operations.                                                                                                                                                    
b. Liquids in the fuel tanks of motor vehicles, aircraft, boats or portable and sta-
tionary engines                                                                                                                                            
c. Beverages where packaged in individual containers that do not exceed 1.3 Gal. 
(5L) capacity.                                                                                                                                             
d. Liquids that have no fire point.                                                                                                         
e. Medicines, food stuffs, cosmetics and consumer products that contain not more 
than 50% by volume of water miscible flammable or combustible liquids and pack-
aged in individual containers that do not exceed 1.3 Gal. (5L) capacity.                      
f. Liquids with flashpoint greater than 950F (350C)  in a water-miscible solution or 
water-miscible dispersion with a water and noncombustible solids content of more 
than 80% by weight                                                                                                                               
g. Distilled spirits and wines in wooden barrels or casks.  

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

Table 13.2.: Indoor Storage of Liquids in Containers 

1. GENERAL    

 

 

 

i. 
ii. 

Unstable liquids shall be treated as Class IA liquids. 
flammable liquids shall not be permitted in basements, unless in compliance with 
MAQ as per Table 13.2.6. and Table 13.2.7.  

iii.  Wood of at least 25 mm nominal thickness shall be permitted to be used for shelv-

ing, racks, dunnage, scuff boards, floor overlay and similar installations. 

iv.  Where storage on racks exists, a minimum 1.2 m wide aisle shall be provided be-

tween adjacent rack sections and any adjacent storage of liquids.  

v.  Main aisles shall be a minimum of 2.4 m. 
vi.  Solid pile and palletized storage in liquid warehouses shall be arranged so that piles 

are separated from each other by at least 1.2 m.  

vii.  Aisles shall be provided and arranged so that no container or portable tank is more 

than 6 m from an aisle. Main aisles shall be a minimum of 2.4 m. 

viii.  Limited quantities of combustible commodities, shall be permitted to be stored in 
liquid storage areas if the ordinary combustibles, other than those used for packag-
ing the liquids, are separated from the liquids in storage by a minimum of 2.4 m 
horizontally, either by aisles or by open racks, if area is sprinklered. 

ix.  Storage of empty or idle combustible pallets inside an unprotected liquid storage 
area shall be limited to a maximum pile size of 230 m2 and to a maximum storage 
height of 1.8 m. 
Containers or portable tanks in unprotected liquid storage areas shall not be stored 
closer than 1 m to the nearest beam, chord, girder, or other roof member. 

x. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1003 of 1348 

Table 13.2.: Indoor Storage of Liquids in Containers 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

2.  CONSTRUCTION 

i. 

OF THE ROOM 

ii. 

All storage rooms shall be constructed in accordance with Chapter 1. Con-
struction, with fire rating requirements as per Table 13.2.a. 
Exterior walls shall be constructed to provide ready access for fire-fighting 
operations by means of access openings, windows, or lightweight noncom-
bustible wall panels. 

iii.  All exterior doors shall have provision to open outside during emergency. 
iv.  The opening protection shall comply with Chapter 1. Construction. 

                                                                       

Table 13.2.a.: Construction of Storage Areas 

TYPE OF STORAGE AREA 

INTERIOR 

EXTERIOR 

ROOFS 

DOOR FIRE 

WALLS 

WALLS 

RATING 

1. INSIDE ROOMS—FLOOR AREA LESS THAN 15 m2 

2. INSIDE ROOMS—FLOOR AREA  15 m2—50 m2 

3. CUTOFF ROOMS- FLOOR AREA LESS THAN 30 m2 

1 Hour 

2 Hour 

1 Hour 

 

 

 

 

 

45 Minutes 

90 Minutes 

1 Hour 

45 Minutes 

4. CUTOFF ROOMS- FLOOR AREA MORE THAN 30 m2 

2 Hour 

2 Hour 

2 Hour 

90 Minutes 

5. LIQUID WAREHOUSES, SPRINKLERED 

2 Hour 

2 Hour 

 

90 Minutes 

Table 13.2.: Indoor Storage of Liquids in Containers 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

3.  ACCEPTABLE 

i.  Metal containers, metal intermediate bulk containers (IBS’s), and metal 

CONTAINERS 

ii. 

portable tanks listed and approved for flammable liquids. 
Plastic containers meeting the requirements of, and used for petroleum 
products, complying to Section 6. of this chapter.  

iii.  Rigid nonmetallic IBC’s and composite IBC’s with rigid inner receptacles. 
They shall be listed and labeled to demonstrate suitability for indoor stor-
age. 

iv.  Small glass containers. 
v.  Medicines and FMCG’s (Fast Moving Consumer Goods) where packaged and 

approved by concerned authorities, according to commonly acceptable 
practice for retail sales.  

vi.  Class IA and Class IB liquids shall be permitted to be stored in glass contain-
ers of not more than 5 L (1.3 gal) capacity, if the required liquid purity (such 
as ACS analytical reagent grade or higher) would be affected by storage in 
metal containers or if the liquid can cause excessive corrosion of the metal 
container. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1004 of 1348 

                                                                       

Table 13.2.: Indoor Storage of Liquids in Containers 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

4.  QUANTITY AND 

i.  Maximum allowable container sizes shall comply with Table 13.2.b. 

CONTAINER SIZE        

RESTRICTION 

Table 13.2.b.: Container Sizes for Indoor Storage of Liquids  

CONTAINER TYPE 

FLAMMABLE LIQUID 

COMBUSTIBLE LIQUID 

Class IA 

Class IB 

Class IC  Class  II 

Class IIIA 

1. GLASS 

0.15 Gal 

0.27 Gal 

1.3 Gal 

1.3 Gal 

5.3 Gal 

2. APPROVED PLASTIC AND METAL CON-

TAINER 

3. SAFETY CANS 

4. RIGID PLASTIC IBS’s AND COMPOSITE 

IBS’s WITH RIGID INNER RECEPTACLES 

1.3 Gal 

5.3 Gal 

5.3 Gal 

5.3 Gal 

5.3 Gal 

2.6 Gal 

5.3 Gal 

5.3 Gal 

5.3 Gal 

5.3 Gal 

- 

- 

- 

793 Gal 

793 Gal 

5. METAL DRUMS 

119 Gal 

119 Gal 

119 Gal 

119 Gal 

119 Gal 

6. APPROVED METAL PORTABLE TANKS 

AND IBS’s 

793 Gal 

793 Gal 

793 Gal 

793 Gal 

793 Gal 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

Table 13.2.: Indoor Storage of Liquids in Containers 

5.  STORAGE      

CABINETS 

 

i. 

ii. 

Approved metal cabinets shall be required when aggregate volume of liq-
uids exceeds the following quantities. a. Class I AND Class II liquids exceed-
ing 10 Gal. b. The aggregate volume of Class IIIA liquids exceeding 60 Gal. c. 
The aggregate volume of Class IIIB liquid exceeding 220 Gal.  
The volume of Class I, Class II, and Class IIIA liquids stored in a storage cabi-
net shall not exceed 454 L (120 gal). 

iii.  The number of storage cabinets located in any one fire area shall not exceed  

3 in non sprinklered area and 6 in sprinklered area. 

iv.  Additional number of cabinets in such groups shall be separated by 30 m, in 

industrial occupancies. 

v.  All flammable liquid storage cabinets, where proposed shall be metal flam-

mable liquid storage cabinets. However, wooden cabinets with bottom, 
sides, and top constructed of exterior grade plywood that is at least 25 mm 
thick and of a type that will not break down or delaminate under fire condi-
tions, shall be permitted. 

vi.  Such storage metal cabinets shall be Civil Defence listed and approved. See 

Section 6.1.3. 

vii.  The metal cabinets with bottom, top, door, and sides of the cabinet having  
at least No. 18 gauge sheet steel and double-walled, with 38 mm air space, 
shall be acceptable. 

viii.  Incompatible liquids shall not be stored in the same cabinet. 
ix.  Cabinet shall not be ventilated. If ventilation is required based on material 
safety data sheet or based on client requirement, the integrity of the cabi-
net with the ventilation arrangement must be demonstrated. 
Flammable liquid cabinet shall be yellow in colour. At the upper portion of 
the front door word “FLAMMABLE” & “KEEP FIRE AWAY” shall be written in 
red colour. 

x. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1005 of 1348 

                                                                       

Table 13.2.: Indoor Storage of Liquids in Containers 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

6.  MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE         

QUANTITIES  PER CONTROL            

AREA OF  

ASSEMBLY 

HEALTHCARE 

BUSINESS 

DAYCARE 

i.  Maximum allowable quantities per control area of Assem-
bly, Healthcare, Business, Daycare, Detention and Correc-
tional, Educational and Residential occupancies shall com-
ply with Table 13.2.c. 

ii.  Where different classes of liquids are stored, the maximum 

quantity per control area shall be sum of percentage of 
each class of liquid quantity. Such sum of percentages shall 
not exceed 100. 
If anticipated storage quantity exceeds MAQ, approval shall 
be obtained from Civil Defence. 

iii. 

DETENTION AND CORRECTIONAL 

iv.  Maximum number of control area and percentages of MAQ 

EDUCATIONAL 

RESIDENTIAL 

 

allowed shall be in accordance with Table 13.2.e. 

Table 13.2.c.: Maximum Allowable Quantities in Assembly, Healthcare, Business, Daycare, Detention 

and Correctional, Educational and Residential 

CLASS 

MAXIMUM QUANTITY  

1. FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS 

1.1. I  

 

10 Gal. 

2. COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS 

 

10 Gal. 

60 Gal. 

660 Gal. (2500 L)  
is the maximum day fuel allowed to be connected to the indoor 
engine. Quantity more than this or spare storage of liquids shall 
comply with separation, tank certification and compartmenta-
tion requirements of other sections of this chapter. 

2.1. II 

2.2. IIIA 

2.3. IIIB 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1006 of 1348 

                                                                       

Table 13.2.: Indoor Storage of Liquids in Containers 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

7.  MAXIMUM      

i.  Maximum allowable quantities for Mercantile Occupancies, per control area 

ALLOWABLE 

QUANTITIES  

PER CONTROL 

shall comply with Table 13.2.d. 

ii.  Where different classes of liquids are stored, the maximum quantity per control 

area shall be sum of percentage of each class of liquid quantity. Such sum of 
percentages shall not exceed 100. 

AREA OF   

iii.  Any liquid container stored in mercantile, shall not exceed 119 Gal. (450 L). in 

MERCANTILE 

OCCUPAN-

iv. 

CIES 

capacity. 
Liquids of containers greater than 6 Gal. (23L) capacity shall not be stored or 
displayed in areas normally accessible to public. 

v.  On floors above ground floor, class IB, IC, and II liquids shall be limited to 60 gal. 

aggregate quantities in unprotected mercantile occupancy, and 120 gal. aggre-
gate capacities in protected occupancy. Class IA liquids are permitted to be 
stored only at ground floor. 

 

Table 13.2.d.: Maximum Allowable Quantities per Control Area in Mercantile Occupancies 

CLASS 

MAXIMUM QUANTITY WITHOUT 

MAXIMUM QUANTITY  WITH      

SPRINKLER PROTECTION 

SPRINKLER PROTECTION 

1. FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS 

 

1.1. IA 

1.2. IB  

1.3. IC 

60 Gal. 

3750 Gal. 

3750 Gal. 

2. COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS 

 

 

120 Gal. 

7500 Gal. 

7500 Gal. 

 

3750 Gal. (60 Gal. if not on 
ground floor) 

7500 Gal. (120 Gal. if not on 
ground floor) 

2.1. II 

2.2. IIIA 

2.3. IIIB 

3750 Gal. 

15,000 Gal. 

NUMBER OF CONTROL AREAS 

02 

STORAGE HEIGHT LIMIT 

1.5 m 

7500 Gal. 

30,000 Gal. 

02 

2 m 

STORAGE DENSITY LIMIT 

21 Gal per m2  in storage, display 
and adjacent aisles 

42 Gal per m2 in storage, display 
and adjacent aisles 

FLOOR LEVEL 

1. BASEMENT 2 

2. BASEMENT 1 

3. GROUND FLOOR 

4. FIRST FLOOR 

5. SECOND FLOOR 

6. OVER SECOND FLOOR 
 

Table 13.2.e.: Control Area and MAQ Factor 

MAQ FACTOR 

NUMBER OF CONTROL AREAS 

50% 

75% 

100% 

75% 

50% 

5% 

2 

3 

4 

3 

2 

1  

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1007 of 1348 

                                                                       

Table 13.2.: Indoor Storage of Liquids in Containers 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

iii.  Means of Egress shall comply with Chapter 3. Means of Egress. 
iv.  Fire extinguishers shall be provided throughout in accordance with           

Chapter 4. Fire Extinguishers. 

v.  Warning Signs and Exit Signs shall be provided in accordance with            

Chapter 5. Exit Signs. 

vi.  Emergency Lighting shall comply with Chapter 6. Emergency Lighting. 

8.  OTHER                  

i. 

APPLICABLE 

CODES FOR THE 

ii. 

Fire Detection and Alarm System shall be provided in accordance with   
Chapter 8. Fire Detection and Alarm System. 
Fire Protection System shall be provided in accordance with Table 9.27.19., 
Chapter 9. Fire Protection Systems. 

INDOOR STORAGE 

OF LIQUIDS 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1008 of 1348 

2.5.  Storage and Usage of Liquids in Warehouses and Industrial 

Occupancies 

2.5.1. 

 
2.5.2. 

 
 2.5.3. 

 
2.5.3. 

 

The storage and usage of Flammable and Combustible Liquids in Warehouses and 
Industrial occupancies shall comply with the Table 13.1. General Requirements, 
13.2. Indoor Storage of Liquids in Containers and Table 13.3. Storage of Liquids in 
Warehouses and Industrial Occupancies. 

The containers referred for storage of Flammable and Combustible Liquids in this 
section apply to 4 distinct size limitations.                                                                                        
a. Drums and other containers that do not exceed 119 Gallons. (450 L) capacity.                                                     
b. Portable tank that do not exceed 660 Gallons. (2500 L) capacity.                                                                            
c. Intermediate Bulk Containers that do not exceed 793 Gallons (3000 L) capacity. 

This section shall apply to general purpose warehouse, Liquid Warehouse, Industri-
al usage of liquids and storages.                                                                                       

Table 13.3. shall not apply to                                                                                                               
a. Containers, intermediate bulk containers and portable tanks that are used in 
operations other than incidental operations such that vehicle assembly, assembly 
of electrical equipment, chemical plant maintenance shop, cleaning and sanitation.                                                                                                                                                    
b. Liquids in the fuel tanks of motor vehicles, aircraft, boats or portable and sta-
tionary engines                                                                                                                                            
c. Beverages where packaged in individual containers that do not exceed 1.3 Gal. 
(5L) capacity.                                                                                                                                             
d. Liquids that have no fire point.                                                                                                         
e. Medicines, food stuffs, cosmetics and consumer products that contain not more 
than 50% by volume of water miscible flammable or combustible liquids and pack-
aged in individual containers that do not exceed 1.3 Gal. (5L) capacity.                         
f. Liquids with flashpoint greater than 950F (350C) ) in a water-miscible solution or 
water-miscible dispersion with a water and noncombustible solids content of more 
than 80% by weight.                                                                                                                     
g. Distilled spirits and wines in wooden barrels or casks. 

Table 13.3.: Storage and Usage of Liquids in Warehouses and Industrial Occupancies 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. GENERAL    

i. 

Solid pile and palletized storage shall be arranged with aisles and cross aisles such 
that no container, portable tank or intermediate bulk container (IB’s) is more than 
6 m from an aisle. 

ii.  Width of a solid piled or stack of containers shall not exceed  12 m. The cross 

aisles shall be 1.2 m and main aisles shall be 2.4 m.  

iii.  Storage of idle combustible pallets inside the sprinklered buildings shall be in ac-

cordance with Chapter 9, idle pallets design criteria. 

iv.  Where building is not sprinklered, idle combustible pallets shall be limited to a 

v. 

maximum pile area size of 230 m2 and maximum storage height of 1.8 m. 
Storage of empty idle combustible pallets shall be separated from storage of liquid 
containers by minimum of 2.4 m aisles.  

vi.  Stock piled shall be restricted to  

a. 100 m2  for Class I and Class II liquids. 
b. 144 m2  for Class III liquids. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1009 of 1348 

                                                                       

Table 13.3.: Storage and Usage of Liquids in Warehouses and Industrial Occupancies 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

2.  MAXIMUM      

ALLOWABLE 

QUANTITIES  PER 

CONTROL AREA 

OF GENERAL 

WAREHOUSE  

AND INDUSTRIAL 

OCCUPANCIES 

i.  Maximum allowable quantities for incidental storage of liquid in industrial 
and storage (general purpose) occupancies shall comply with Table 13.3.a. 
ii.  Maximum number of control area and percentage of MAQ allowed shall be 

in accordance with Table 13.2.e. 

iii.  Storage height shall be restricted to 3 m. 
iv.  No other materials shall be stored over the liquid 
v.  Minimum separation distance of 3 m shall be maintained from other storage 

and activities. 

vi.  Storage arrangement shall comply with section 12.8, NFPA 30 handbook. 

Table 13.3.a.: Maximum Allowable Quantities per Control Area in                                                                   

General Warehouse and Industrial Occupancies 

CLASS 

MAXIMUM QUANTITY WITHOUT 

MAXIMUM QUANTITY  WITH       

SPRINKLER PROTECTION 

SPRINKLER PROTECTION 

1. FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS 

 

1.1. IA 

1.2. IB AND IC 

30 Gal. 

120 Gal. 

 

60 Gal. 

240 Gal. 

1.3. IA, IB, IC COMBINED 

120 Gal. without exceeding            
individual MAQ 

240 Gal. without exceeding              
individual MAQ 

2. COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS 

 

2.1. II 

2.2. IIIA 

2.3. IIIB 

120 Gal. 

330 Gal. 

13,200 Gal. 

 

240 Gal. 

660 Gal. 

26,400 Gal. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1010 of 1348 

Table 13.3.: Storage and Usage of Liquids in Warehouses and Industrial Occupancies 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

3.  STORAGE           

i. 

ARRANGEMENT 

ii. 

Palletized and solid pile storage arrangement for indoor liquid storage shall 
be as per Figure 13.9.  
Rack storage arrangement for indoor liquid storage shall be as per Figure 
13.8.a.  

iii.  Rack depths and aisle arrangements for liquids in warehouses shall comply 

with Figure 13.8.b.  

iv.  All warehouses storing flammable and combustible liquids shall be provided 

with Automatic Sprinkler System in accordance with Chapter 9. 

 

Figure 13.8.a.: Aisles, stacks and Rack arrangement for Containers  

                                                                       

Figure 13.8.b.: Permitted Rack Depth  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1011 of 1348 

 

 
                                                                       

Figure 13.9.: Acceptable Palletized and Solid Piled Storage arrangement for indoor liquid storage 

Figure 13.9.: Acceptable Rack Storage arrangement for indoor liquid storage 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1012 of 1348 

Table 13.3.: Storage and Usage of Liquids in Warehouses and Industrial Occupancies 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

4.  OUTDOOR  

i. 

STORAGE IN 

CONTAINERS 

The outdoor storage of liquids in containers shall comply with quantity and sepa-
ration limitations as per Table 13.3.b. 

ii.  No point in the outdoor storage shall be more than 60 m from a minimum of 6 m 

wide fire access way. 

iii.  The outdoor storage area shall be graded in a manner to divert possible spills 

away from building and other exposures. They shall be surrounded by 150 mm 
high curb. Proper drain arrangement must be provided for collected spills and 
firefighting/rain water. 

iv.  Where near public vicinity, the storage shall be sufficiently protected from unau-

thorized access and tampering. 
The storage area shall be kept free of weeds, debris and other combustible dust. 

v. 
vi.  The storage area shall be permitted to be protected from weather by a canopy 

or roof. Such an open shed not limit                                                                                        
a. The dissipation of heat                                                                                                      
b. Dispersion of flammable vapour                                                                                         
c. Fire fighting access and control. 

vii.  The wall of the building facing the storage must be 2 hours fire rated with appro-
priate opening protections to the complete length of the storage and an extend-
ed length of 3 m on both sides of the storage line of sight. 

viii.  Minimum separation distance of 6 m must be maintained from the building 

where Class I & II liquids are stored and 3 m for Class III liquid. 

ix.  Manual fire protection system shall be provided to cover the external storage in 
accordance with Chapter 9. The coverage and hose stream demand shall comply 
with Table 13.3.5.ii. 

Table 13.3.b.: Outdoor Storage Quantities Limitation in Storage and Industrial Occupancies 

MAQ PER PILE/
LIQUID                          
RACK 2, 4 
CLASS 

MAXIMUM 
STORAGE 
HEIGHT 

BETWEEN 
PILES/
RACKS 

TO THER      
OUTDOORS 
STORAGE 

TO PRPERTY 
LINE 1, 4 

TO STREET, 
PUBLIC           
WAY 1, 4 

1100 Gal. 

2200 Gal. 

4400 Gal. 

8800 Gal. 

22000 Gal. 

2.4 m 

2.4 m 

2.4 m 

3.6 m 

3.6 m 

1.5 m 

1.5 m 

1.5 m 

1.5 m 

1.5 m 

3 m 

3 m 

3 m 

3 m 

3 m 

30 m 

30 m 

30 m 

15 m 

6 m 

6 m 

6 m 

6 m 

3 m 

3 m 

Notes : 
 
1.  Where public or private yard hydrants are available inline with this code, distance to 
property line, street, alley and public way shall be permitted to be reduced by half.   

2.  MAQ indicated does not apply for rack storage. Racks must be 15 m in length and 2.7 m 

in depth. 

3.  When two or more class of liquid are stored in same pile, the restriction for most haz-

4. 

ardous liquid shall apply. 
If storage per pile is less than 50% of MAQ, the distance to property line, street, alley or 
public way can be reduced by 50 %. 

5.  Where metal IBCs or portable tanks are stored, the MAQ can be doubled. 
6. 

 Plastic IBCs or portable tanks are not permitted for outdoor storage of Class I liquid.                                                                  

IA 

IB 

IC 

II 

III 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1013 of 1348 

 

Table 13.3.: Storage and Usage of Liquids in Warehouses and Industrial Occupancies 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

5.  OTHER                  

i. 

APPLICABLE 

CODES FOR THE 

WAREHOUSE 

AND INDUSTRIAL 

STORAGE OF   

LIQUIDS 

Fire Detection and Alarm System shall be provided in accordance with   
Chapter 8. Fire Detection and Alarm System. 
Fire Protection System shall be provided in accordance with Table 9.27.11., 
Chapter 9. Fire Protection Systems. 

ii. 

iii.  Means of Egress shall comply with Chapter 3. Means of Egress. 
iv.  Fire extinguishers shall be provided throughout in accordance with           

Chapter 4. Fire Extinguishers. 

v.  Warning Signs and Exit Signs shall be provided in accordance with            

Chapter 5. Exit Signs. 

vi.  Emergency Lighting shall comply with Chapter 6. Emergency Lighting. 

                                                                       

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1014 of 1348 

2.6.  Outdoor Tank Storage (Fixed Tank and Fixed System Tank) 

2.6.1. 

 
2.6.2. 

 
2.6.3. 

The storage of Flammable and Combustible Liquids in Tanks in any occupancies, 
indoor or outdoor shall comply with the general requirements of Table 13.1. Gen-
eral Requirements, this section and Table 13.4. Storage of liquids in Tanks. 

This section shall apply to “Fixed Tanks” of following capacity.                                                                                        
a. Fixed tanks that exceed 60 Gallons. (230 L) capacity.                                                     
b. Portable tank that exceed 660 Gallons. (2500 L) capacity.                                                                            
c. Intermediate Bulk Containers that exceed 793 Gallons (3000 L) capacity. 

Any portable tanks not exceeding 660 Gal (2500 L) capacity and intermediate Bulk 
containers not exceeding 793 Gal (3000 L) capacity but are connected to a “fixed” 
system, closed or otherwise, shall comply to this section. 

Table 13.4.: Storage of Liquids in Outdoor Fixed Tanks 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. GENERAL    

2.  DESIGN AND 

CONSTRUC-

TION OF 

STORAGE 

TANKS 

i. 

ii. 

Storage of Class II and Class III liquids heated at or above their flash points shall 
follow the requirements for Class I Liquids. 
Tanks shall be permitted to be of any shape, size or type provided they are test-
ed, approved and listed for the purpose. 

iii.  Metal tanks shall be welded, riveted and caulked, or bolted or constructed using 

combination of any of these methods. 

iv.  Tanks designed and intended for aboveground use shall not be used as under-

v. 

i. 
ii. 

ground tanks. 
Tanks designed and intended for underground use shall not be used as above 
ground tanks. 

Tanks shall be of steel or other approved non-combustible material. 
tanks constructed of combustible material shall be specifically approved and 
listed for the type of liquid and type of storage method. 

iii.  unlined concrete tanks shall be permitted to be used for storing liquids that have 

a gravity of 400 API or heavier. 

iv.  An engineering evaluation shall be made if the specific gravity of the liquid to be 
stored exceeds that of water or if the tank is designed to contain liquids at a liq-
uid temperature below –180C. 
See Section 6. for tank material approvals and test standards. 

v. 

3. VENTING 

i. 

Storage tanks shall be vented to prevent the development of vacuum or pres-
sure above 1 psi, above maximum operating pressure, that can distort the tank 
or exceed the rated design pressure. 

ii.  Normal vents shall be at least as large as the largest filling or withdrawal connec-

tion, but in no case shall be less than 32 mm nominal inside diameter. 
iii.  Normal vents shall be located above the maximum normal liquid level. 
iv.  Normal venting shall be provided for primary tanks and each primary compart-

ment of compartmented tanks. 

v.  Vents shall be sized and designed and installed as per API Standard 2000. 
vi.  For tanks equipped with vents that permit pressures to exceed a gauge pressure 
of 2.5 psi and for low pressure tanks and pressure vessels, the outlet of all vents 
and vent drains shall be arranged to discharge in a manner that prevents local-
ized overheating of or flame impingement on any part of the tank, if vapors from 
the vents are ignited. 

vii.  Aboveground storage tanks shall have emergency relief venting in the form of 

integral construction or a device that will relieve excess internal pressure caused 
by an exposure to fire. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1015 of 1348 

 

Table 13.4.: Storage of Liquids in Outdoor Fixed Tanks 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

4.  CORROSION  

PROTECTION    

i.  Metal used to fabricate the tank shall be thick enough to compensate for 
internal corrosion expected during the design life of the tank or other ap-
proved means of corrosion protection shall be provided. 

ii.  As external corrosion protection, all underground tanks shall be provided 
with Cathodic protection system that is properly engineered, installed and 
maintained as per international standards, unless listed and certified as cor-
rosion resistant tank. 

iii.  Where geographical area demands or where engineering analysis requires 

additional corrosion protection, an internal protection such as additional 
metal thickness and corrosion resistant coating and linings shall be provided 
for all tanks. 

5.  COMMISSION-

i. 

ING AND               

TESTING 

All tanks, whether shop built or field welded, field erected , shall be tested 
before they are placed in service. 

ii.  All tanks shall have permanent listing and approval standard marking on the 

tanks as evidence of compliance.  

iii.  Permanent test records and test results shall be maintained by the owner. 
iv.  Where static head of the bottom of the tank, when filled with liquid, ex-

ceeds 10 psi, the tank and its piping shall be hydrostatically pressure tested 
to a pressure equal to the static head of the liquid filled tank. 
Before the tank is placed in service, all leaks or deformations shall be cor-
rected in an approved manner. 

v. 

vi.  All above ground tanks and connections shall be tested for tightness after 

installation and before placed in service, in accordance with PEI RP200, Rec-
ommended Practice for installation of aboveground storage systems for mo-
tor vehicle fueling and STI R931, Double wall AST Installation and Testing 
Instructions. 

vii.  Underground tanks shall be tested for tightness at operating pressure with 

air, inert gas or water. 

6.  PERIODIC                

i. 

TESTING AND 

INSPECTION 

ii. 

Each tank shall be tested periodically as per manufacturer’s instructions and 
as required by applicable standards to ensure the integrity of the tank. 
Refer to NFPA 329, Recommended Practice for Handling Releases of Flam-
mable and Combustible Liquids and Gases, for testing of underground tanks. 

iii.  Refer to API 653, STI SP001, API 12R1 and API RP2350 for Tank Inspection, 
Repair, Alteration, Reconstruction and overfill protection of storage tanks. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1016 of 1348 

Table 13.4.: Storage of Liquids in Outdoor Fixed Tanks 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

7.  ABOVE 

GROUND 

STORAGE 

TANKS  

1.  LOCATION 
 
i. 

Tank location shall be such that it shall not jeopardize structures, property and lives 
of own or the neighbors.  

ii.  Aboveground storage tanks shall be spaced and installed in accordance with latest 
edition of PEI RP200, Recommended Practice for Installation of Aboveground Stor-
age Systems for Motor Vehicle Fueling. 

iii.  The values in Table 13.4.b. and Table 13.4.c. shall be derived from the reference 

iv. 

v. 

Table 13.4.a. 
Location of aboveground storage tanks storing flammable and combustible liquids 
(Class I, Class II OR Class IIIA), other than Class III B, shall be in compliance with      
Table 13.4.b. 
Location of Aboveground storage tanks storing Boil-Over Liquids and Unstable Liq-
uids shall comply with Table 13.4.c. 

vi.  Dike subdivision criteria shall comply with Table 13.4.e. 
vii.  Location of Aboveground storage tanks storing Class III B liquids shall comply with 

Table 13.4.f. 

viii.  Minimum shell to shell separation between aboveground storage tanks shall be as 

per Table 13.4.g. 

Table 13.4.a.: Reference Table based  on Tank Capacity to be used with other tables 

TANK CAPACITY                      

MINIMUM DISTANCE FROM ANY BUILDING 

MINIMUM DISTANCE FROM               

IN GALLONS 

IN SAME PROPERTY AND FROM NEAREST 

PROPERTY LINE,  INCLUDING OPPOSITE 

PUBLIC WAY (A)  

SIDE OF PUBLICWAY (B) 

275 OR LESS 

276—750 

751– 12,000 

12,001– 30,000 

30,001– 50,000 

50,001– 100,000 

100,001– 500,000 

500,001– 1,000,000 

1,000,001– 2000,000 

2,000,001– 3,000,000 

3,000,001 OR MORE 

1.5 m 

1.5 m 

1.5 m 

1.5 m 

3 m 

4.5 m 

7.6 m 

10.6 m 

13.6 m 

16.6 m 

18 m 

 
 
                                                                       

1.5 m 

3 m 

4.5 m 

6 m 

9 m 

15 m 

24 m 

30 m 

41 m 

50 m 

53 m 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1017 of 1348 

Table 13.4.b.: Location of Aboveground Tanks for Liquids, Class I, Class II or Class IIIA 

TYPE OF TANK 

 
 
                                                                       

PROTECTION  MINIMUM DISTANCE IN 

MINIMUM DISTANCE IN 

METERS FROM ANY                 

METERS FROM               

BUILDING IN SAME 

PROPERTY LINE,                

PROPERTY AND FROM 

INCLUDING OPPOSITE 

NEAREST PUBLIC WAY  

SIDE OF PUBLICWAY 

1. FLOATING ROOF 

 

 

 

1.1. INTERNAL PRESSURE < 2.5 PSI 

 

Exposure 
protection 

None 

1
/6 X Diameter of Tank 

0.5  X Diameter of Tank 

1
/6 X Diameter of Tank  Diameter of Tank but 
not more than 53 m. 

1.2. INTERNAL PRESSURE > 2.5 PSI 

Exposure 
protection 

1.5 X A (Table 13.4.a.) 
but not more than 7.6m 

1.5 X B (Table 13.4.a.) 
but not more than 7.6m 

 

None  

1.5 X A (Table 13.4.a.) 
but not more than 7.6 m 

3 X B (Table 13.4.a.) but 
not more than 15m 

2. VERTICAL (WEAK ROOF TO SHELL)   

 

 

2.1. INTERNAL PRESSURE < 2.5 PSI 

Foam System  1

/6 X Diameter of Tank 

0.5  X Diameter of Tank 

 

 

Exposure 
protection 

None 

1
/3 X Diameter of Tank  Diameter of Tank 

1
/3 X Diameter of Tank 

2 X Diameter of Tank 
but not more than 
106m. 

2.2. INTERNAL PRESSURE > 2.5 PSI 

Exposure 
protection 

1.5 X A (Table 13.4.a.) 
but not more than 7.6 m 

1.5 X B (Table 13.4.a.) 
but not more than 7.6m 

 

None  

1.5 X A (Table 13.4.a.) 
but not more than 7.6 m 

3 X B (Table 13.4.a.) but 
not more than 15 m 

3. HORIZONTAL/VERTICAL TANKS 

 

 

 

WITH RELIEF VENTING 

3.1. INTERNAL PRESSURE < 2.5 PSI 

Foam System  0.5 X A (Table 13.4.a.) 

0.5 X B (Table 13.4.a.) 

 

 

Exposure 
protection 

A (Table 13.4.a.) 

B (Table 13.4.a.) 

None 

A (Table 13.4.a.) 

2 X B (Table 13.4.a.) 

3.2. INTERNAL PRESSURE > 2.5 PSI 

Exposure 
protection 

1.5 X A (Table 13.4.a.) 
but not more than 7.6 m 

1.5 X B (Table 13.4.a.) 
but not more than 7.6m 

 

None  

1.5 X A (Table 13.4.a.) 
but not more than 7.6 m 

3 X B (Table 13.4.a.) but 
not more than 15 m 

4. FIRE RESISTANT ABOVE GROUND 

TANK 

4.1. INTERNAL PRESSURE < 2.5 PSI 

4.2. INTERNAL PRESSURE > 2.5 PSI 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.5 X A (Table 13.4.a.) 

0.5 X B (Table 13.4.a.) 

1.5 X A (Table 13.4.a.) 
but not more than 7.6 m 

3 X A (Table 13.4.a.) but 
not more than 15 m 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1018 of 1348 

Table 13.4.c.: Location of Aboveground Tanks for Boil-Over Liquids and Unstable Liquids  

TYPE OF TANK 

 
 
PROTECTION 
                                                                       

MINIMUM DISTANCE IN 

MINIMUM DISTANCE IN 

METERS FROM ANY                 

METERS FROM               

BUILDING IN SAME 

PROPERTY LINE,                

PROPERTY AND FROM 

INCLUDING OPPOSITE 

NEAREST PUBLIC WAY  

SIDE OF PUBLICWAY 

1. FLOATING ROOF 

 

 

 

1.1. BOIL-OVER LIQUID 

 

2. FIXED ROOF 

2.1. BOIL-OVER LIQUID 

 

 

Exposure         
protection 

None 

 

1
/6 X Diameter of Tank  0.5  X Diameter of Tank 

1
/6 X Diameter of Tank  Diameter of Tank  

 

 

Foam System 

1
/3 X Diameter of Tank  Diameter of Tank 

Exposure             
protection 

None 

2
/3 X Diameter of Tank  2 X Diameter of Tank  

2
/3 X Diameter of Tank  4 X Diameter of Tank 
but not more than   
106 m 

3.   HORIZONTAL/VERTICAL TANKS 

 

 

 

WITH RELIEF VENTING OF IN-

TERNAL PRESSURE < 2.5 PSI 

3.1. UNSTABLE LIQUID 

Foam System 

Not less than 7.6 m 

B (Table 13.4.a.) but 
not less than 7.6 m 

 

 

Exposure           
protection 

Not less than 15 m 

None 

Not less than 30 m 

2.5 X B (Table 13.4.a.) 
but not less than 15 m 

5 X B (Table 13.4.a.) 
but not less than 30 m 

4.  HORIZONTAL/VERTICAL TANKS 

 

 

 

WITH RELIEF VENTING OF INTER-

NAL PRESSURE > 2.5 PSI 

4.1. UNSTABLE LIQUID 

Foam System 

Not less than 15 m 

2 X B (Table 13.4.a.) 
but not less than 15 m 

 

 

 

Exposure          
protection 

Not less than 30 m 

None 

Not less than 45 m 

4 X B (Table 13.4.a.) 
but not less than 30 m 

8 X B (Table 13.4.a.) 
but not less than 45 m 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1019 of 1348 

 

Table 13.4.: Storage of Liquids in Outdoor Fixed Tanks 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

7.  ABOVEGROUND 

STORAGE TANKS  

2. REMOTE IMPOUNDING 
 
i. 

Remote Impounding method shall provide drainage to a remote impounding 
area so that spilled liquid does not collect around the tank. 
The drainage route shall have a slope of not less than 1% away from the 
tank, property line and building towards impounding area. 

ii. 

iii.  The designated impounding area shall be minimum 15 m from the tank, 

property line and nearby buildings. 

iv.  The capacity of impounding area shall be of 110% capacity equal to the larg-

v. 

est tank that may drain into it. 
The drainage route shall be so located that if the liquid in the drainage is 
ignited, the fire will not seriously expose tanks or property. 

vi.  Any other impounding method that follows internationally recognized 

standard and acceptable to Civil Defence is also permitted. Details of such 
impoundment shall be detailed in the submission. 

 

 
                                                                       

Figure 13.9.: Remote Impounding  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1020 of 1348 

Table 13.4.: Storage of Liquids in Outdoor Fixed Tanks 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

7.  ABOVE-

GROUND 

STORAGE 

TANKS  

3. OPEN DIKE OR BUND 
 
i. 

Dike shall be constructed to provide containment around the tank or group of 
tanks. 

ii.  Dike shall be sized to hold 110% of volume of largest tank within the dike, exclud-

ing the volume of other tank(s) within the dike. 

iii.  Minimum clear space of 3 meters shall be maintained all around the dike. 
iv.  The dike wall shall be minimum half diameter away from the tanks contained 

v. 

within the dike.  
Construction of dike wall shall be with concrete, solid masonry or steel, designed 
to be liquid tight and to withstand hydrostatic head by released tank content. 

vi.  The height of the dike wall shall be limited to 2 m to minimize pocketing of flam-

mable vapours and to facilitate fire fighting. 

vii.  Dike shall be provided with drain arrangements to remove the fire fighting agent, 

water with uniform slop of 1% away from the tank towards the sump. 

viii.  Dike containing two or more tanks shall be subdivided by intermediate drain or 

dikes as per type of tanks and their quantities mentioned in Table 13.4.e. 

ix.  Subdivision shall be intermediate drain or minimum ½ m high intermediate dike. 

x. 

Main dike height shall be minimum of intermediate dike. 
The aggregate capacity subdivision requirement shall exclude the individual tank 
subdivision.  

xi.  For example, Volume of the tank V=πd2h/4,                                                                          

Required Volume of Dike = L X B X H       

Where, V-Volume of the tank, d-diameter of the tank, h– height of the tank 
L-length of the dike, B-Breadth of the dike, H-height of the dike                                                                       
V=20,016 m
 

3 , Volume of Dike = Minimum 100.1 m x 100 m x 2 m 

 
 
                                                                       

 

Figure 13.10.: Open Dike 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1021 of 1348 

 

Table 13.4.e.: Dike Sub-Division Criteria (Minimum One Dike Subdivision Requirement) 

TANK CAPACITY IN GALLONS 

STABLE LIQUID 

CLASS I AND                 

1. INDIVIDUAL TANK 

1.1. WEAK SEAM ROOF TANK 

1.2. VERTICAL CONE ROOF TANK 

1.3. HORIZONTAL TANK, OVER  

2. GROUP OF TANKS 

2.1. WEAK SEAM ROOF TANK 

2.2. VERTICAL CONE ROOF TANK 

2.3. HORIZONTAL TANK, OVER  

 
                                                                       

UNSTABLE LIQUID 

INDIVIDUAL CAPACITY 

 

OVER 420,000 Gal. 
(1,590 m

3) 

OVER 100,000 Gal.           
(380 m

3) 

OVER 100,000 Gal.           
(380 m

3) 

Irrespective of capacity 

Irrespective of capacity 

Irrespective of capacity 

AGGREGATE CAPACITY 

 

OVER 630,000 Gal. 
(2,390 m

3) 

OVER 150,000 Gal.      
(570 m

3) 

OVER 150,000 Gal.      
(570 m

3) 

Irrespective of capacity 

Irrespective of capacity 

Irrespective of capacity 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1022 of 1348 

 

Table 13.4.f.: Location of Aboveground Tanks for Class IIIB Liquids  

TANK CAPACITY IN GALLONS 

MINIMUM DISTANCE IN 

MINIMUM DISTANCE IN 

12,000 OR LESS 

12,001– 30,000 

30,001– 50,000 

50,001– 100,000 

100,001 OR MORE 

METERS FROM ANY                 

METERS FROM               

BUILDING IN SAME 

PROPERTY LINE,                

PROPERTY (A) 

INCLUDING OPPOSITE 

SIDE OF PUBLICWAY (B) 

1.5 m 

1.5 m 

3 m 

3 m 

4.5 m 

1.5 m 

3 m 

3 m 

4.5 m 

4.5 m 

Table 13.4.g.: Minimum Shell to Shell Separation Distance between Storage Tanks  

TYPE OF TANK 

TANK DIAMETER 

CLASS I OR CLASS II LIQ-

CLASS III A LIQUIDS 

1.  FLOATING 

 

ROOF 

 

 

 

 

 

Less than or equal to    
45 m 

1
/6 X Sum of adjacent tank 
Diameters but not less than 
1m 

1
/6 X Sum of adjacent tank 
Diameters but not less than 
1m 

More than 45 m With 
Remote Impounding 

1
/6 X Sum of adjacent tank 
Diameters  

1
/6 X Sum of adjacent tank 
Diameters  

More than 45 m With 
Open Diking 

1
/4 X Sum of adjacent tank 
Diameters  

1
/4 X Sum of adjacent tank 
Diameters  

2.  FIXED OR 

 

HORIZONTAL 

 

 

Less than or equal to    
45 m 

1
/6 X Sum of adjacent tank 
Diameters but not less than 
1 m 

1
/6 X Sum of adjacent tank 
Diameters  

More than 45 m With 
remote Impounding 

1
/4 X Sum of adjacent tank 
Diameters  

1
/6 X Sum of adjacent tank 
Diameters  

More than 45 m With 
Open Diking 

1
/3 X Sum of adjacent tank 
Diameters  

1
/4 X Sum of adjacent tank 
Diameters  

 
                                                                       

 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1023 of 1348 

 

Table 13.4.: Storage of Liquids in Outdoor Fixed Tanks 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

7.  ABOVE-

GROUND 

STORAGE 

TANKS  

4.  TANK SHELL TO SHELL SEPARATION 
 
i. 

Aboveground tanks storing Class I, Class II or Class IIIA stable liquids shall be 
separated from shell to shell as per Table 13.4.f. 
The minimum spacing for stable and Class III B liquids shall be 1 m. 

ii. 
iii.  Horizontal tanks shall be treated as fixed roof tanks for separation calculations. 
iv.  Diameter of one tank shall be added to the diameter of adjacent tank to get 

‘sum of adjacent tank diameters’, where there are two tanks. 

v.  Where there are multiple tanks adjacent to each other, diameters of two adja-
cent tanks shall be added to get the ‘sum of adjacent tank diameters’ which is 
the required separation distance. For example, in Figure 13.12.,                                                                                                                                               
a.  Separation distance, D12= Diameter of tank 1+ Diameter of tank 2.                                
b.  Separation distance, D24= Diameter of tank 2+ Diameter of tank 4. 

vi.  Minimum horizontal separation between an LPG container, other than 125 Gal 

capacity and Class I, Class II or Class IIIA liquid tank, other than 660 Gal., shall 
not be less than 6 m. 

vii.  Where flammable and combustible liquid storage tanks are within a diked area, 
the LPG containers, if any, shall be outside the diked area and at least 1 m away 
from the centerline of the wall of the diked area. 

viii.  If a tank storing Class I, Class II or Class IIIA liquid operates at pressures exceed-

ing a gauge pressure of 2.5 psi or is equipped with emergency relief venting that 
will permit pressures to exceed 2.5 psi, it shall be separated from LPG container 
by distance as per Table 13.4.f. 

 

                                                                       

 

Figure 13.12.: Shell to Shell Tank Separation 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1024 of 1348 

ITEM 

 
 
                                                                       

REQUIREMENTS 

8.  UNDERGROUND 

STORAGE TANKS  

1.  LOCATION AND SPACING 
 
i. 

Table 13.4.: Storage of Liquids in Outdoor Fixed Tanks 

Tank location shall be such that it shall not jeopardize structures, property 
and lives of own or the neighbors.  

ii.  Underground tanks shall be located such that the existing building founda-

tions and support loads are not transferred to the storage underground 
tank. 

iii.  Distance from any part of a tank storing any liquid to the nearest wall of any 

basement or pit shall not be less than 0.3 m and to any property line shall 
not be less than 1 m. 

iv.  Underground tanks shall not be located in areas that are prone to flooding. 
 
2.   INSTALLATION 
 
i. 

Installation of all underground storage tanks shall be as per manufacturer’s 
approved design and installation manual and recommendations. 

ii.  Bedding and backfill shall be non-corrosive inert material of a type recom-

mended by the manufacturer, such as compacted clean sand or compacted 
gravel.  

iii.  Underground tanks shall be set on firm foundations and shall be set on mini-

mum bedding depth as recommended by the manufacturer. 

iv.  Bedding shall extend at least 300 mm in all directions beyond the perimeter 

of the tank. 

v.  Underground tanks shall be surrounded with backfill to a depth of at least 

300 mm or greater. 

vi.  The backfill shall be evenly spread in 300 mm to 450 mm vertical lifts and 

shall be compacted as recommended by manufacturer. 

vii.  Underground tanks shall be covered with one of the following                                          

a. At least 300 mm backfill, covered with 300 mm of clean earth.                                  
b. At least 300 mm of compacted backfill, on top of which a slab of rein-
forced concrete, at least 100 mm thick is placed.  

viii.  Where tanks are subjected to traffic, they shall be protected against damage 

from vehicles passing over them by one of the following.                                                 
a. At least 900 mm of backfill.                                                                                                 
b. At least 450 mm of compacted backfill of a type recommended by the 
tank manufacturer and at least 150 mm reinforced concrete slab.                                
c. At least 450 mm compacted backfill of a type recommended by the tank 
manufacturer and at least 200 mm of asphalt concrete. 

ix.  Maximum burial depth shall be as per manufacturer’s recommendations. 

9.  OTHER                  

i. 

APPLICABLE 

CODES FOR THE 

ii. 

OUTDOOR                

Fire Detection and Alarm System shall be provided in accordance with   
Chapter 8. Fire Detection and Alarm System. 
Fire Protection System shall be provided in accordance with Table 9.27.21., 
Chapter 9. Fire Protection Systems. 

iii.  Fire extinguishers shall be provided throughout in accordance with           

STORAGE OF  

Chapter 4. Fire Extinguishers. 

LIQUIDS 

iv.  Warning Signs and Exit Signs shall be provided in accordance with            

Chapter 5. Exit Signs. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1025 of 1348 

2.7.  Fixed Storage Tank Buildings 

2.7.1. 

 
2.7.2. 

 
2.7.3. 

The storage of Flammable and Combustible Liquids in Tanks located inside build-
ings known as “Tank Buildings” shall comply with the general requirements of   
Table 13.1. General Requirements, this section and Table 13.5. Storage of liquids 
in Tank Buildings. 

This section shall apply to aboveground storage tanks located within storage tank 
buildings.                                                                                                                     

This section does not apply to                                                                                                                
a. Liquids stored outside, aboveground and have canopies as cover or roof which 
does not limit the dissipation of heat or dispersion of flammable vapors and does 
not restrict fire fighting access and control.                                                                                       
b. Liquid storage tanks within buildings, in process and special industrial facilities 
(as defined in Chapter 1, Table 1.1. 3.b.) and other areas where liquids are han-
dled, dispensed or transferred. 

Table 13.5.: Storage of Liquids in Tank Buildings 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. GENERAL    

i. 

ii. 

Storage of Class II and Class III liquids heated at or above their flash points shall 
follow the requirements for Class I Liquids. 
Tanks shall be permitted to be of any shape, size or type provided they are tested, 
approved and listed for the purpose. 

iii.  Metal tanks shall be welded, riveted and caulked, or bolted or constructed using 

combination of any of these methods. 

iv.  Tanks designed and intended for aboveground use shall not be used as under-

v. 

ground tanks. 
Tanks designed and intended for underground use shall not be used as above 
ground tanks. 

2.  LOCATION 

i. 

OF TANKS 

ii. 

Tanks and associated equipment within the storage tank building shall be so lo-
cated that a fire in the area shall not constitute an exposure hazard to adjoining 
buildings or tanks. 
Structures housing tanks and storage tank buildings shall be 2 hour fire rated con-
structions in accordance with Chapter 1. Construction. 

iii.  Minimum distance from exposed property lines and buildings for storage tank 

installations within the tank buildings shall comply with Table 13.5.a. 

iv.  Where tank building does not provide exposure protection, the distance require-

ments of Table 13.5.a. shall be doubled. 

v.  Where exterior wall of the tank storage building is 2 hour fire resistance rated, 

the separation distance from any tank to such wall need not be greater than 7.6 
m. 

vi.  Where exterior wall of the storage tank building is 4 hour fire resistance rated, 

the separation distances required by Table 13.5.a. shall not apply. 

vii.  Where Class IA liquids or unstable liquids are stored, the exposing wall shall have 

explosion resistance in accordance with recognized international engineering 
standards and deflagration venting shall be provided in the non exposing walls 
and roof, in accordance with NFPA 68, Standard of Explosion Protection by Defla-
gration Venting. 

The capacity of any individual tank shall not exceed 100,000 Gal inside tank build-
ings. 

3.  MAXIMUM               

i. 

CAPACITY 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1026 of 1348 

Table 13.5.a.: Location of Storage Tanks inside Tank Buildings 

TYPE OF LIQUID 

TANK LIQUID               

MINIMUM DISTANCE  

MINIMUM DISTANCE  

CAPACITY 

FROM ANY          

FROM  PROPERTY 

BUILDING IN SAME 

LINE,   INCLUDING                    

PROPERTY  

OPPOSITE SIDE OF 

PUBLICWAY 

1. STABLE LIQUID 

 

 

1.1. INTERNAL PRESSURE ≤ 2.5 PSI  Up to 12,000 Gal. 

1.5 m 

 

 

 

12,000– 30,000 Gal.  1.5 m 

30,001-50,000 Gal. 

3 m 

50,001-100,000 Gal.  4.5 m 

1.2. INTERNAL PRESSURE > 2.5 PSI  Up to 12,000 Gal. 

3 m 

 

 

 

12,000– 30,000 Gal.  3 m 

30,001-50,000 Gal. 

4.5 m 

50,001-100,000 Gal.  7.6 m 

2. UNSTABLE LIQUID 

 

 

2.1. INTERNAL PRESSURE ≤ 2.5 PSI  Up to 12,000 Gal. 

4.5 m 

 

 

 

12,000– 30,000 Gal.  4.5 m 

30,001-50,000 Gal. 

7.6 m 

50,001-100,000 Gal.  12 m 

2.2. INTERNAL PRESSURE > 2.5 PSI  Up to 12,000 Gal. 

6 m 

12,000– 30,000 Gal.  6 m 

30,001-50,000 Gal. 

12 m 

50,001-100,000 Gal.  18.2 m 

 

4.5 m 

6 m 

9 m 

15 m 

7.6 m 

9 m 

13.7 m 

22.8 m 

 

12 m 

15 m 

22.8 m 

38 m 

18.2 m 

24 m 

36.5 m 

61 m 

 

 

 

 

              Note: Without exposure protection, the separation distances shall be doubled 

Figure 13.13.: Illustration of Table 13.5.2., Tanks Storing Unstable Liquids 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1027 of 1348 

 

Table 13.5.: Storage of Liquids in Tank Buildings 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

4. EQUIPMENT 

i.  Other equipment associated with tanks such as pumps, heaters, filters and 

ii. 

exchangers shall not be located closer than 7.6 m to property lines or to 
nearest important structure. 
Each liquid transfer connection on any tank storing Class I or Class II liquids 
inside building shall be provided with one of the following.                                               
a. A normally closed, remotely activated valve.                                                                    
b. An automatic-closing, heat-activated valve.                                                                        
c. Another approved device 

iii.  Tanks shall be equipped with a device or means to prevent liquid overflow 
into the building, such as float valve, pre-set meter, low head pump incapa-
ble of preventing overflow or liquidtight overflow pipe that discharges by 
gravity back to the outside source of liquid.  

5.  FIRE ACCESS 

6.  CONSTRUCTION 

i. 

ii. 

i. 

Each storage tank building and each tank within the building shall be acces-
sible from at least two sides for Fire fighting and fire control. 
Such access shall be minimum of 1.2 m of aisles between storage tanks. 

Storage tank buildings shall be constructed as to maintain structural integri-
ty for 2 hours under fire exposure. Construction shall comply with                     
Chapter 1. Construction. 

ii.  A clear space of 1 m from top of the tank to roof or structure shall be main-

tained. 

7. CONTAINMENT 

i. 

ii. 

Tank building shall be designed and constructed to prevent the discharge of 
flammable or combustible liquids to public ways, public sewers or adjoining 
property under normal conditions. 
Except for drains, solid floors shall be liquid tight and walls shall be liquid 
tight where they join the floor and for  at least 100 mm above the floor. 

iii.  Openings to adjacent rooms or buildings shall be provided with noncombus-

tible, liquid tight raised sills or ramps at least 100 mm in height. 

iv.  Where basements are there, provisions shall be made such that liquid spills 

v. 

do not drain into basements and mechanical ventilation shall be provided 
for basements to vent off the vapors. 
Spill containment area of the tank storage building shall be sized exactly 
with same considerations as that of sizing an outside aboveground storage 
dike areas, with largest tank holding capacity. 

8. HOUSE KEEPING 

i. 

ii. 

Combustible waste material and residues in operating areas shall be kept to 
a minimum, stored in covered metal containers and disposed of daily. 
Storage of combustible materials and empty or full drums or barrels shall 
not be permitted within the large storage tank building. 

9.  OTHER                  

i. 

APPLICABLE 

CODES FOR THE 

ii. 

Fire Detection and Alarm System shall be provided in accordance with   
Chapter 8. Fire Detection and Alarm System. 
Fire Protection System shall be provided in accordance with Table 9.27.19., 
Chapter 9. Fire Protection Systems. 

INDOOR           

STORAGE OF   

LIQUIDS 

 

iii.  Means of Egress shall comply with Chapter 3. Means of Egress. 
iv.  Fire extinguishers shall be provided throughout in accordance with           

Chapter 4. Fire Extinguishers. 

v.  Warning Signs and Exit Signs shall be provided in accordance with            

Chapter 5. Exit Signs. 

vi.  Emergency Lighting shall comply with Chapter 6. Emergency Lighting. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1028 of 1348 

2.8.  Storage Tank Vaults 

2.8.1. 

The design, construction and installation of flammable liquid and combustible liq-
uid storage vaults shall comply with the applicable general requirements of Table 
13.1. General Requirements and Table 13.6. Storage Vaults. 

 
 
 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

Table 13.6.: Storage Vaults 

1.  GENERAL                   
i. 

REQUIREMENTS  

Clearance between the shell of a tank or equipment in a vault shall be ade-
quate to permit the following.                                                                                                  
a. Entry into the vault interior by an inspector or maintenance worker.                     
b. Access to manipulate, repair or replace any equipment or fittings in the 
vault.                                                                                                                                            
c. Access within the vault to visually inspect, either by direct sight or with 
aid of any optical vision extension tools, interior vault surfaces and exterior 
surfaces of tanks equipment to determine the source of any leakage that 
may occur and for repairs. 
ii. 
Tanks installed in storage tank vaults shall be listed for aboveground use. 
iii.  Each tank shall be in its own vault and shall be completely enclosed by the 

vault to prevent fires spreading among multitank installations. 

iv.  Backfill shall not be permitted around the tank, inside vault. 
v.  Vaults shall be constructed and listed in accordance with UL 2245, Standard 

for below grade vaults for flammable liquid storage tanks. 

vi.  At each entry point into the vault, a warning sign indicating the need for 

procedures for safe entry into confined spaces shall be posted. 

vii.  An approved means of overfill protection shall be provided for the tanks in 

vaults. The use of ball float valves shall be prohibited. 

                                                                       

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1029 of 1348 

 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

Table 13.6.: Storage Vaults 

2.  VAULT                       

i. 

ARRANGEMENT  

Separation distances required for above ground storage tanks as required 
by Table 13.4.7. shall be permitted to be reduced to 0 m, where tanks are 
installed in listed and approved vaults and as measured from the outer pe-
rimeter of the vault wall. 

ii.  Vaults are permitted to be either above or below grade. 

3.  CONSTRUCTION 

i. 

OF VAULTS 

ii. 

The walls and floor of the vault are to be constructed of reinforced concrete 
of at least 150 mm thick.  
The top and floor of the vault and the tank foundation must be designed to 
withstand all anticipated loading, soil loading, hydrostatic loading, including 
loading from vehicular traffic, if any.  

iii.  vault must be liquid tight. 
iv.  The vault enclosure must have no openings except those necessary for ac-

cess, inspection of, and filling, emptying and venting of the tank. 

v.  Vault must be provided with connections to permit ventilation to dilute, dis-

perse and remove any vapors to prior to personnel entering the vault. 

vi.  Vault must be provided with means of personnel entry. 
vii.  Vault must be provided with an approved means to admit a fire suppression 

agent. 

viii.  The top of an abovegrade vault that contains a tank storing Class I flamma-

ble liquid or Class II liquid when stored at temperatures above its flash point 
shall be constructed of noncombustible material and shall be designed to be 
weaker than the walls of the vault to ensure that the thrust of any explosion 
occurring inside the vault is directed upward before destructive internal 
pressure develops within the vault. 

ix.  The top of an at-grade or belowgrade vault that contains a tank storing Class 
I flammable liquid or Class II liquid when stored at temperatures above their 
flash points shall be designed to relieve or contain the force of any explosion 
occurring inside the vault. 

 
 
                                                                       

Figure 13.14.: Vault Installations with respect to Grade 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1030 of 1348 

 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

Table 13.6.: Storage Vaults 

4.  VENTING  

i. 

ii. 

Vent pipes that are provided for normal tank venting shall terminate out-
side the vault and at least 3.5 m above the ground level. 
Emergency vents shall be vapor tight and shall be permitted to discharge 
inside the vault. Long bolt manhole covers shall not be permitted for this 
purpose. 

iii.  Vaults that contain tanks storing Class I liquids shall be ventilated at a rate 

of not less than 0.3 m3/min/m2  (1cfpm/ft2) but not less than 4 m3/min 
(150 cfpm/ft2). Such ventilation shall operate continuously or shall be de-
signed to operate upon activation of a vapor and liquid detection system. 

5. VAPOR DETECTION 

i. 

Each vault shall be provided with an approved liquid detection system 
that is equipped with on-site audible and visual warning devices with 
battery backup. 

ii.  Vapor detectors shall be provided, located not more than 300 mm above 

the lowest point in the vault. 

iii.  Systems shall be designed and installed as per manufacturer’s recommen-

dations. 

 
 
                                                                       

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1031 of 1348 

2.9.  Bulk Loading and Unloading Facilities 

The bulk loading and unloading operations of Flammable and Combustible Liquids 
of tank cars and tank vehicles (Tankers) shall comply with the applicable general 
requirements of   Table 13.1. General Requirements, this section and Table 13.7. 
Loading and Unloading of Tankers. 

2.9.1. 

 
 

Table 13.7.: Loading and Unloading of Tankers 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  BONDING AND 

i. 

GROUNDING  

ii. 

Loading and unloading facilities that are used to load liquids into tank vehi-
cles through open domes shall be provided with a means for electrically 
bonding to protect against static electricity hazards. 
Such means shall consist of a metallic bond wire that is permanently electri-
cally connected to the fill pipe assembly. 

iii.  All parts of fill pipe assembly, including but not limited to, the drop tube, 
rack structure and piping shall form a continuous electrically conductive 
path that is directed to ground through the rack assembly or by conductive 
wiring. 

iv.  The use of nonconductive materials in fill pipe assembly shall be avoided to 

v. 

prevent any electrical discontinuity. 
Loading and unloading facilities that are used to transfer liquids into and 
from tank cars through open domes shall be protected against stray cur-
rents by permanently bonding the fill pipe to at least one rail and to the fa-
cility structure, if of metal. 

vi.  Multiple pipelines that enter the area shall be permanently bonded togeth-

vii. 

er. 
In areas where excessive stray currents are known to exist, all pipelines en-
tering the area shall be provided with insulating sections to electrically iso-
late them from the facility piping. 

 
                                                                       

Figure 13.15.: Use of Jumper Wires around gasketed Swivel Joints to ensure continuity 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1032 of 1348 

Table 13.7.: Loading and Unloading of Tankers 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

2.  LOCATION OF 

i. 

LOADING AND 

UNLOADING           

FACILITIES  

ii. 

Loading and unloading facilities shall be separated from above ground 
tanks, warehouses or other plant buildings, adjacent property line by a dis-
tance of at least 7.6 m for Class I liquids, Class II and Class III liquids handled 
at temperatures at or above their flash point. 
Loading and unloading facilities shall be separated from above ground 
tanks, warehouses or other plant buildings, adjacent property line by a dis-
tance of at least 4.6 m for Class II and Class III liquids handled at tempera-
tures below their flash point. 

3. OPERATION 

iii.  Where exposure protection is provided with fixed water spray systems, the-

se separation distances shall be reduced to half. 

i. 

ii. 

Liquids shall be loaded only into cargo tanks whose material of construction 
is compatible with the chemical characteristics of the liquid. 
The liquid being loaded shall also be chemically compatible with the liquid 
hauled on the previous load unless the cargo has been cleaned. 

iii.  Before loading tank vehicles through open domes, a bonding connection 

shall be made to the vehicle or tank before dome covers are raised and shall 
remain in place until filling is competed and all dome covers have been 
closed and secured. 

iv.  When transferring Class I liquids or Class II or Class III liquids at tempera-
tures at or above their flash points, potential ignition sources such as en-
gines of tank vehicles or motors of auxiliary or portable pumps shall be shut 
down during the making and breaking of hose connections. 

 
 
 
                                                                       

Figure 13.16.: Separation distances for Tank Loading and Unloading Facilities 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1033 of 1348 

2.10. 

Incidental Operations Using Flammable and Combustible  
Liquids 

2.10.1. 

Incidental operations using flammable and combustible liquids shall comply with 
the applicable general requirements of Table 13.1. General Requirements and               
Table 13.8. Incidental Operations Using Flammable and Combustible Liquids. 

Table 13.8.: Incidental Operations Using Flammable and Combustible Liquids 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

i. 
1.  PAINTING           
ii. 

OPERATIONS 

Painting shall be permitted as incidental operation only in Industrial Occupancy. 
The painting operation shall be confined to painting room or pre fabricated 
paint booth. 

(PAINTING 

BOOTH)  

iii.  The painting rooms and painting booth shall be constructed of and separated 
from surrounding areas by construction assemblies that have 2 hours fire re-
sistance rating. 

iv.  Where the facility is protected by sprinkler system, the fire resistance rating 

shall be permitted to be reduced to 1 hour. 

v.  A clear space of 1 m shall be maintained on all sides of paint booths and 

painting rooms. 

vi.  Panels for light fixtures shall be heat treated glass, laminated glass or wired 

glass and shall be suitably sealed to confine vapors, sprays, dusts, residues and 
deposits to the spray area. 

vii.  Panel for light fixtures shall be separated from fixture to limit the temperature 

of the panel from exceed 93°C  

viii.  Portable or hand lamps shall not be used during painting operation. 
ix.  All electrically conductive objects in the spray area shall be earthed or bonded 

x. 

to discharge static electricity. 
The quantity of liquid used for paining, that are stored in immediate vicinity to 
the painting room or booth shall be limited to quantity required for 1 shift (8 
hours) operation. Such quantity shall not exceed maximum allowed quantity as 
stipulated in Table 13.2.6., Table 13.2.7. and Table 13.2.8. MAQ’s. 

xi.  Such liquid shall be minimum 3 m away from paint room or booth, vehicle mov-

ing path way, exits, corridors, exit accessways and ignition source. 

xii.  Liquid quantity required for single mixing, transfer or dispensing operation shall 

be taken inside the painting room or booth. This shall not exceed 60 Gal. 

xiii.  Ventilation System shall be provided in compliance with Table 13.1.6.  
xiv.  Paint booth or paint room area classification shall be as per Table 13.8.a. 
xv.  Hazardous classification Zone 1 Division 1 shall extend 1.5 meters around the 

communication openings. 

xvi.  Hazardous classification Zone 1 Division 2 shall extend 6.0 meters around the 

communication opening. 

Table 13.8.a.: Paint Room or Paint Area Classification  

TYPE OF                           

LIQUID CLASS  DURATION PER 

FIRE                              

VENTILATION 

HAZARD AREA 

OPERATION 

WEEK 

PROTECTION 

SYSTEM 

CLASSIFICATION 

1. BRUSH/SPRAY  I or II or III 

Any 

Mandatory 

Mandatory 

Class I Division I 

2. BRUSH 

3. BRUSH 

4. SPRAY 

5. SPRAY 

 

II or III 

II or III 

II or III 

II or III 

Up to 10 Hours  Not Mandatory  Not Mandatory  Class I Division II 

Over 10 Hours  Mandatory 

Not Mandatory  Class I Division II 

Up to 10 Hours  Not Mandatory  Mandatory 

Class I Division I 

Over 10 Hours  Mandatory 

Mandatory 

Class I Division I 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1034 of 1348 

 

Table 13.8.: Incidental Operations Using Flammable and Combustible Liquids 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

2.  REFUELING 

i.  The incidental operation of refueling shall be carried out only in the industrial 

OPERATIONS 

occupancy.  

ii.  The dispensing device shall be minimum 3 m from the property line, nearby 
building and all outside storages (include above ground liquid storage tank). 

iii.  Sufficient barriers, guards and protection shall be provided to prevent vehicular 

and other mechanical damages to the storage and dispensing equipment. 

iv.  See Section 3 of this chapter for detailed Fuel dispensing requirements.  

3.  AEROSOL/ 

i.  Propellant charging operation and related pumping system shall be limited within 

PROPELLANT 

CHARGING 

enclosed premises and at ground floor only. 

ii.  Propellant charging room and related pumping system shall be separated from 

adjoining facilities and property line by 2 hour fire rated compartment, in accord-
ance with Chapter 1. Construction. 

iii.  All machineries shall be minimum 1.5 m from the building wall. 
iv.  Flammable and combustible liquids and flammable propellant storage tanks shall 

not be in the same compartment where filling operation is carried out.  

v.  The staging of filled aerosol and empty containers in the propellant charging area 
shall be limited to container that will be filled within one shift. Such storage shall 
not exceed 1.5 meters in height and shall be kept minimum 3 m away from the 
charging and pumping area.  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1035 of 1348 

3.  Motor Fuel Dispensing Facilities 

 

3.1.  General Requirements 

 
3.1.1. 

 
3.1.2. 

 
3.1.3. 

 
3.1.4. 

 
3.1.5. 

The requirements for motor fuel dispensing facilities storing liquid fuels and relat-
ed materials such as oils, greases, cleaning solvents, windshield cleaning solvents 
etc., shall comply with this section. 

The relevant general requirements of Table 13.1. General Requirements for Stor-
age of Flammable and Combustible Liquids and other relevant sections of this 
chapter for storage of flammable and combustible liquids aboveground, under-
ground, in tank buildings etc., shall apply to storage of Liquids at Fuel Dispensing 
facilities unless otherwise, specified by this section specifically for the quantities 
and methods.  

A motor fuel dispensing facility located at a bulk plant shall be separated from are-
as in which bulk plant operations are conducted by a fence or other approved bar-
rier.  

Dispensing devices at the motor fuel dispensing facility shall not be supplied by 
aboveground tanks located in the bulk plant. Storage tanks at motor fuel dispens-
ing facilities shall not be connected by piping to aboveground tanks located in the 
bulk plant. 

Class I liquids shall not be stored or handled in a building that has a basement or 
pit into which ignitable vapors can travel, unless the basement or pit is provided 
with ventilation that will prevent the accumulation of vapors. The ventilation sys-
tem shall be capable of providing at least 1 cfpm/Ft2 of exhaust of floor area (0.3 
m3/min/m2), but not less than 4 m3/min (150 cfpm). Please see Chapter 10., Section 
2.20. 

 
3.1.6.  Where tanks are at an elevation that produces a gravity head on the dispensing 

device, the tank outlet shall be equipped with a device, such as a normally closed 
solenoid valve, positioned adjacent to and downstream from the valve that is in-
stalled and adjusted so that liquid cannot flow by gravity from the tank if the pip-
ing or hose fails when the dispenser is not in use. 

 
3.1.7. 

 
3.1.8. 

Tanks storing Class I and Class II liquids at an individual site shall be limited to a 
maximum individual capacity of 12,000 gal and aggregate capacity of  48,000 gal 
unless such tanks are installed in vaults complying with Section 2.8, in which case 
the maximum individual capacity shall be permitted to be 15,000 gal. 

Tanks designed and built for underground use shall not be installed for above 
ground use. 

 
3.1.9.  Underground storage tanks used in fuel dispensing facilities shall be installed in 

accordance with Table 13.4.8. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1036 of 1348 

3.2.  Specific Requirements for Fuel Dispensing Facilities 

 
3.2.1. 

The specific requirements for motor fuel dispensing facilities storing liquid fuels 
and related materials such as oils, greases, cleaning solvents, windshield cleaning 
solvents etc., shall comply with Table 13.9. 

Table 13.9.: Requirements for Fuel Dispensing Facilities 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  ABOVEGROUND 

i.  Minimum distances of separation required for aboveground tanks at Motor 

TANK                  

SEPARATION   

DISTANCES 

fuel dispensing facilities shall be in accordance with Table 13.9.a. 

ii.  The maximum individual tank capacity of 12,000 Gal indicated in Table 

13.9.a., shall be permitted to be increased to 20,000 Gal. for Class II and Class 
III liquids stored at fleet vehicle motor fuel dispensing facility and aggregate 
capacity shall be allowed to be 80,000 Gal. 

iii.  At fleet vehicle motor fuel dispensing facilities, no minimum separation shall 
be required between the dispensing device and a tank in a vault, a protected 
tank, or a fire-resistant tank. 

Table 13.9.a.: Separation of Aboveground Tanks at Motor Fuel Dispensing Facilities  

TYPE OF                           

INDIVIDUAL TANK              

BETWEEN 

FROM ANY 

FROM FUEL 

FROM 

FROM  

THE TANK 

CAPACITY 

TANKS 

STRUCTURE 

DISPENSING 

BOUNDARY 

NEAREST 

1. TANKS IN VAULT  0- 15,000 Gal 

Separate 
compart-
ments 

DEVICE 

LINE 

PUBLIC 

WAY 

0 m 

0 m 

0 m 

0 m 

2. PROTECTED 

0- 6000 Gal 

1.5 m 

1.5 m 

ABOVE GROUND 

TANKS 

 

6001—12,000 Gal  1.5 m 

3. FIRE RESISTANT 

0-12,000 Gal 

1.5 m 

4.6 m 

7.6 m 

TANKS 

0 

0 

7.6 m 

4.6 m 

1.5 m 

7.6 m 

15 m 

4.6 m 

7.6 m 

4. OTHER              

0-12,000 Gal 

1.5 m 

15 m 

15 m 

30 m 

15 m 

APPROVED 

TANKS 

 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1037 of 1348 

Table 13.9.: Requirements for Fuel Dispensing Facilities 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

2.  SAFETY                             

i.  Means shall be provided for determining the liquid level in each tank, and 

PRECAUTIONS FOR                  

ABOVEGROUND 

the tank reaches 90% of capacity.  

this means shall be accessible to the delivery operator. 

ii.  Means shall be provided to sound an audible alarm when the liquid level in 

STORAGE TANKS 

iii.  Means shall also be provided either to automatically stop the flow of liquid 

into the tank when the liquid level in the tank reaches 98% capacity or to 
restrict the flow of liquid into the tank to a maximum flow rate of 9.5 L/min 
(2.5 gpm) when the liquid in the tank reaches 95 percent capacity. These 
provisions shall not restrict or interfere with the operation of either the 
normal vent or the emergency vent. 

3.  FUEL                             

DISPENSING AT 

INDUSTRIAL OR 

i.  Maximum quantity of aboveground storage tank shall not exceed 6000 Gal. 
ii.  An inspection of the premises and operations shall be evaluated by House 

of Expertise and approved by Civil Defence. 

iii.  Such fuel dispensing shall be only for their own vehicles used for their own 

MANUFACTURING 

businesses. 

FACILITIES 

iv.  The tank system shall be listed for aboveground use. 
v.  Tank installation, material and operation shall comply with this chapter of 

UAE Fire and Life Safety Code of Practice. 

 
 

Figure 13.17.: Separation distances of Aboveground Storage Tanks at Dispensing Facilities   

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1038 of 1348 

 

Table 13.9.: Requirements for Fuel Dispensing Facilities 

OCCUPANCY 

REQUIREMENTS 

4.  ELECTRICAL                

i.  Classified area adjacent to Fuel dispensing shall be in accordance with            

CLASSIFIED AREA 

5.  CONSTRUCTION 

 

Figure 13.18. 

i.  Construction shall meet the requirements of Chapter 1. Table 1.9.33. 
ii.  Where fuel dispensing is indoors, the fuel dispensing area shall not be lo-
cated more than 15 m from the vehicle exits and entrances from the exte-
rior wall, outside of the building. 

Figure 13.18.: Electrical Classified Area adjacent to Fuel Dispensers   

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1039 of 1348 

 
 

ITEM 

6.  ABOVE-

GROUND  

STORAGE 

TANKS IN 

VAULTS 

Table 13.9.: Requirements for Fuel Dispensing Facilities 

REQUIREMENTS 

i.  Vault design and construction shall comply with Section 2.8. 
ii.  Where tanks in Storage Vaults are in use, the individual tank sizes shall be lim-
ited to 15,000 Gal. and maximum aggregate capacity shall be 48,000 Gal. Each 
tank shall be in separate compartment. 

iii.  Each vault and its tank shall be anchored to withstand uplifting by groundwa-

ter or flooding, including when the tank is empty. 

iv.  Vaults that are not resistant to damage from the impact of a motor vehicle 

shall be protected by collision barriers. 

v.  Dispensing devices shall be allowed to be installed on tops of vaults. 
vi.  Means shall be provided to recover liquid from the vault. If a pump is used to 

meet this requirement, the pump shall not be permanently installed in the 
vault. 

vii.  Electric-powered portable pumps shall be approved for use in Class I, Division 

1 Locations. 

viii.  At each entry point, a warning sign indicating the need for procedures for safe 

entry into confined spaces shall be posted. Each entry point shall be secured 
against unauthorized entry and vandalism. 

7. FUEL               

1.  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

DISPENSING 

SYSTEMS 

i.  Dispensing devices installed outside at motor fuel dispensing stations shall be 

located as follows:                                                                                                                  
a. 3 m or more from property lines                                                                                                               
b. 3 m or more from buildings, other than canopies, having combustible exteri-
or wall surfaces or buildings having noncombustible exterior wall surfaces that 
are not a part of a one-hour fire-resistive assembly.                                         c. 
Such that all parts of the vehicle being served will be on the premises of the 
service station                                                                                                                            
d. Such that the nozzle, when the hose is fully extended, will not reach within 
1.5 m of building openings 

ii.  Liquids shall not be dispensed by applying pressure to drums, barrels, and simi-
lar containers. Listed pumps taking suction through the top of the container or 
listed self-closing faucets shall be used. 

 
2.   DISPENSING DEVICES 

i.  Class I and Class II liquids shall be transferred from tanks by means of fixed 

pumps designed and equipped to allow control of the flow and prevent leak-
age or accidental discharge. 

ii.  Dispensing devices for Class I and II liquids shall be listed. 
iii.  A control shall be provided that will permit the pump to operate only when a 
dispensing nozzle is removed from its bracket or normal position with respect 
to the dispensing device and the switch on this dispensing device is manually 
actuated. This control shall also stop the pump when all nozzles have been re-
turned to their brackets or to their normal non-dispensing position. 

iv.  Where liquid is supplied to the dispensing device under pressure, a listed, rig-

idly anchored emergency shutoff valve, incorporating a fusible link or other 
thermally actuated device, designed to close automatically in event of severe 
impact or fire exposure shall be installed in the supply line at the base of each 
individual island-type dispenser or at the inlet of each overhead dispensing 
device. 

v.  Remote and submersible pumps shall be tested, approved and listed for the 

 

purpose. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1040 of 1348 

 

Table 13.9.: Requirements for Fuel Dispensing Facilities 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

7. FUEL DISPENSING 

3.   DISPENSING HOSE 

SYSTEMS 

i.  Hose assemblies shall be approved and listed for fuel dispensing. 
ii.  Hose length at automotive motor fuel dispensing facilities shall not exceed 

5.5 m. 

iii.  Where hose length at marine motor fuel dispensing facilities exceeds 5.5 

m, the hose shall be secured so as to protect it from damage. 

iv.  A listed emergency breakaway device designed to retain liquid on both 
sides of the breakaway point shall be installed on each hose dispensing 
Class I and II liquids, as per manufacturer’s instructions and specifications. 

 
4.   FUEL DELIVERY NOZZLES 

i.  A listed, automatic-closing-type hose nozzle valve, with or without latch-
open device, shall be provided on island-type dispensing devices used to 
dispense Class I liquids. 

ii.  At any installation where the normal flow of product may be stopped other 

than by the hose nozzle valve, the system shall include listed equipment 
with a feature that causes or requires the closing of the hose nozzle valve 
before product flow can be resumed or before the hose nozzle valve can 
be replaced in its normal position in the dispenser or the hose nozzle valve 
shall not be equipped with a latch-open device. 

iii.  Dispensing nozzles used at marine motor fuel dispensing facilities shall be 

of the automatic-closing type without a latch-open device.  

 
5.   FUEL DELIVERY NOZZLES 

i.  Fuel dispensing systems shall be provided with one or more clearly identi-
fied emergency shutoff devices or electrical disconnects. Such devices or 
disconnects shall be installed in approved locations but not less than 6 m 
or more than 30 m from the fuel dispensing devices that they serve. 

 
                                                

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1041 of 1348 

 

Table 13.9.: Requirements for Fuel Dispensing Facilities 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

iv.  Means of Egress shall comply with Chapter 3. Means of Egress. 
DISPENSING                     
v. 

Fire extinguishers shall be provided throughout in accordance with           
Chapter 4. Fire Extinguishers. 

vi.  For fuel dispensing areas, extinguishers shall be provided as required by 
the extra high hazard requirements for Class B hazards (80:B:C), trolley 
mounted, with maximum travel distance not exceeding 30 m.  

vii.  Warning Signs and Exit Signs shall be provided in accordance with            

Chapter 5. Exit Signs. 

viii.  Emergency Lighting shall comply with Chapter 6. Emergency Lighting. 
ix.  Where LPG systems are required for restaurant kitchens, it shall comply 

with Chapter 11. Liquid Petroleum Gas Systems.  

8.  OTHER APPLICABLE 

i. 

CODES FOR         

ENCLOSED AREAS 

ii. 

OF FUEL               

DISPENSING                

FACILITIES AND 

INDOOR FUEL                  

Fire Detection and Alarm System shall be provided in accordance with   
Chapter 8. Fire Detection and Alarm System. 
Repair garages used for repair of vehicle engine fuel systems fueled by 
non-odorized gases, such as Hydrogen and non-odorized LNG/CNG, shall 
be provided with approved gas detection system in accordance with man-
ufacturer’s specifications. 

iii.  Fire Protection System shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 9. 

Fire Protection Systems. 

FACILITIES  

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1042 of 1348 

4.  Operational Requirements 

4.1. 

The operational safety related to flammable and combustible liquid storage, han-
dling and usage and management methodology used to identify, evaluate and con-
trol hazards shall comply with Table 13.10. 

Table 13.10.: Operational Requirements 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. GENERAL 

i.  The fire protection system shall be maintained in proper operating condition, in 

accordance with design intent. 

ii.  The quantity and quality  of the water supply and extinguishing agents, if any, 

shall be continuously monitored in accordance with Chapter 9 and manufactur-
er’s recommendations and approved design basis. 

iii.  Permanent connections between fire water system and process system shall be 

prohibited. 

iv.  The emergency management system shall be established and maintained in ac-

cordance with Section 5. 

v.  Maintenance and operational procedures shall be established and implemented 

to control leakage and prevent spillages. 

vi.  Combustible waste materials and residues in operating areas shall be kept to a 

minimum, stored in covered metal container and disposed of daily. 

vii.  Aisles established for movement of personnel shall be clearly marked and shall 

not be obstructed. 

i.  All operation involving flammable and combustible liquid or aerosol shall be re-
viewed on continuous basis to ensure fire and explosion hazards are addressed 
by fire prevention, fire control and emergency management procedures. The 
evaluation shall include but not limited to following.                                                 
a. Analysis of fire and explosion hazard of the operation.                                                  
b. Analysis of emergency relief from process vessels.                                                     
c. Analysis of applicable facility design requirements.                                                      
d. Analysis of applicable requirements for liquid handling, transfer, and use.       
e. Analysis of local conditions such as exposure to and from adjacent properties 
and other possible natural calamities.                                                                            
f. Analysis of the compatibility and response from all emergency services and 
mutual aids. 

ii.  Such hazard analysis shall be revisited and reviewed whenever there are chang-

es in the premises, changes in conditions, such as, but not limited to,                              
a. When major change takes place in management of the facility.                                                    
b. When change occurs in the materials involved in the process.                                
c. When changes occurs in the process, process controls and related equipment.                                                                                                                                                
d. When changes occur in operation procedures.                                                              
e. When notable change occur in the property and nearby property construc-
tions.                                                                                                                                                  
f. When changes occur in emergency management procedures.  

i.  Precaution shall be taken to prevent the ignition of liquids or aerosol and related 
flammable vapors due to sources such as open flames, lighting, hot surface, radi-
ation heat, smoking, fabrication, friction, static electricity and stray current. 

ii.  Smoking shall be permitted only in designated areas. 
iii.  Proper hot work permit system shall be established and implemented. 
iv.  All metallic equipment such as tanks, machineries, and piping shall be properly 

bonded and grounded. 

2.  HAZARD 

ANALYSIS   

3. HOTWORK 

AND              

IGNITION 

 

CONTROL OF                     

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1043 of 1348 

 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

Table 13.10.: Operational Requirements 

ii.  Following methods shall be used for monitoring as appropriate:                                    

a. Personnel observation and patrolling.                                                                                 
b. Process monitoring equipment to measure abnormality in pressure and 
temperature parameters and possible spill or leakage that could occur.                       
c. Provision of gas detectors to continuously monitor the area where facili-
ty is unattended.                                                                                                                                 
d. Provision of Fire detection and alarm system. 

iii.  The fire protection system must be maintained in proper operating condi-

tion in-line with design intent and UAE Fire and Life Safety Code of Practice. 

iv.  The quantity and quality of the water supply and extinguishing agents 
(where used) shall be continuously monitored in line with engineering 
standards and manufacturer’s recommendation. Permanent connection 
between fire water system and any process system must be prohibited. 
v.  Emergency management system and preparedness procedures must be 

established and maintained. See Section 5. 

vi.  Maintenance and operational procedures must be established and imple-

mented to control leakage and prevent spillages. 

vii.  Combustible waste materials and residues in operating area shall be kept 
to a minimum, stored in covered metal containers and disposed off daily. 
viii. Aisles established for movement of personnel and emergency responders, 

fire access etc. shall be clearly marked and shall not be occupied or ob-
structed. 

ix.  Proper management methods used to identify, evaluate and control the 
security hazard involved in the processing and handling liquids and aero-
sols must be established and implemented. This includes but not limited to 
sabotage and other malicious attacks. 

4. EMERGENCY                 

i.  An approved means for prompt notification of fire or emergency to emer-
gency team within plant, to relevant authority and Civil Defence shall be 
established and properly maintained. 

PREPAREDNESS  

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1044 of 1348 

5.  Emergency Management System (EMS) 

 
5.1. 

The Emergency Management System (EMS) must be established in accordance 
with Table 13.11. 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

Table 13.11.: Emergency Management System (EMS)  

1.  EMS  

i.  Plans and corresponding response procedures that will ensure preparedness to handle 

following scenarios.                                                                                                                                           
a. Fire / Explosion.                                                                                                                                       
b. Spillage.                                                                                                                                         
c. Occupant Evacuation.                                                                                                                 
d. All other emergency that are expected. 

ii.  EMS shall address following as minimum:                                                                                         

a. Emergency management roles and responsibilities.                                                          
b. Risk based emergency scenarios.                                                                                                  
c. Emergency Actions.                                                                                                                  
d. Emergency Evacuation Plans.                                                                                                  
e. List of available resources.                                                                                                       
f. Communication plan and procedures.                                                                                     
g. Periodic tests, drills and exercise requirements.                                                                 
h. Monitoring and review of EMS.  

iii.  Emergency scenarios shall be some or all of the following as applicable to the facility:                                                                                                                                     

a. Natural hazards such as flood, lightening, earth quakes etc.                                              
b. Spillage.                                                                                                                                       
c. Fire. 

iv.  Designate personnel as part of Emergency Response Management Team (ERMT) to 

manage the emergency situation. Such individuals shall be:                                                 
a. competent and qualified to their assigned roles.                                                               
b. Trained and equipped to preform safely their assigned work.                                            
c. Knowledgeable of the risk and their possible solutions.  
Identify specific roles and responsibilities of each member of the ERMT 

v. 
vi.  Emergency management system shall provide all activities, from the notification of an 
emergency incident, through incident stabilization, up to the recovery from the impact 
of the incident. It shall be addressed for each of the emergency scenario.  

vii.  Emergency Reporting  Procedure and Communication Plan shall be established. This 
shall be coordinated with Civil Defense where required. These shall consist of the fol-
lowing information:                                                                                                                                   
a. Information about the Alarm system other Emergency Communication facilities.                                                                                                                                               
b. Emergency contact details of the facility.                                                                              
c. Procedure for the dissemination of relevant Information .                                                                              
d. Procedure for Reporting of incidents and outcomes. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1045 of 1348 

 

Table 13.11.: Emergency Management System (EMS)  

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  EMS  

viii. Emergency Evacuation Plan shall be prepared which includes:                                                                  

a. Emergency personnel in charge, including their duties.                                                           
b. Escape Routes, Exit maps and Diagrams. See Chapter 4., Table 5.1.8.                           
c. Procedures for evacuation.                                                                                                           
d. Location of fire –fighting equipment.                                                                                       
e. Assembly Points. 

ix.    Ensure that the employees, especially the emergency personnel are trained and 

certified in the use of Fire-fighting equipment through an approved training institu-
tion. 

x.    Conduct Mock-up Drills and Exercises (Emergency Actions and Evacuation) in order 

to:                                                                                                                                                        
a. Evaluate the Emergency Management Program                                                              
b. Test or validate the procedures or plans and identify its deficiencies                      
c. Clarify roles and responsibilities                                                                                             
d. Validate training and education of the appointed emergency personnel 

xi.   Emergency Plans and procedures shall be reviewed periodically to ensure applica-

bility to the current condition of the facility and its operation.  

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1046 of 1348 

6.  Flammable and Combustible Liquid Storage Materi-

al Test Standards and Approvals. 

 

6.1.  Acceptable Test Standards and criteria 

 

6.1.1.  All the Materials, Systems, Assemblies, wiring, fittings, equipment, Products and 

Accessories, referred to in this chapter shall be Listed, Approved and Registered by 

the Civil Defence Material Approval Department. 

6.1.2.  There is no year of edition mentioned against any test standards. It is the intent of 

Civil Defence to convey to the customers seeking laboratory tests and the test la-

boratories to follow the “LATEST EDITION OF THE TEST STANDARD, AS AND WHEN 

THEY ARE UPGRADED/REVISED/AMENDED, TO THE DATE.” 

6.1.3.  Storage Cabinets 

i.  NFPA 251, Standard Methods of Tests of Fire Endurance of Building Construction 

and Materials 

6.1.4.  Atmospheric Tanks 

i. 

API Specification 12B, Bolted Tanks for Storage of Production Liquids 

ii.  API Specification 12D, Field welded Tanks for Storage of Production Liquids 

iii.  API Specification 12F, Shop welded Tanks for Storage of Production Liquids 

iv.  API Specification 650, Welded steel tanks for oil storage 

v.  UL 58, Standard for Steel Underground Tanks for Flammable and Combustible 

Liquids 

vi.  ANSI/UL 80, Standard for Steel Tanks for Oil-burner fuels and other combus-

tible liquids 

vii.  ANSI/UL 142, Standard for Steel Aboveground Tanks for Flammable and Com-

bustible Liquids 

viii. UL 1316, Standard for Glass-Fiber Reinforced Plastic Underground Storage tanks 

for Petroleum products, Alcohol, and Alcohol-Gasoline Mixture. 

ix.  ANSI/UL 1746, Standard for External Corrosion Protection Systems for steel 

Underground Storage Tanks 

x.  ANSI/UL 2080, Standard for Fire Resistant Tanks for Flammable and combus-

tible liquids 

xi.  ANSI/UL 2085, Standard for protected Aboveground Tanks for Flammable and 

combustible liquids 

xii.  BS EN 14015, Specification for the design and manufacture of site built, verti-
cal, cylindrical, flat-bottomed, above ground, welded, steel tanks for the stor-
age of liquids at ambient temperature and above. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1047 of 13486.1.5.  Low Pressure Tanks 

i. 

API Specification 620, Recommended Rule for the design and construction of 
Large, Welded, Low-Pressure Storage Tanks 

ii.  ASME, Code for Unified Pressure Vessels, Section VIII, Division 1. 

 

6.1.6.  Vaults 

UL 2245, Standard for below grade vaults for flammable liquid storage tanks 

i. 

 

6.1.7.  Powered Trucks and Forklifts 

i. 

UL 558, Standard for Safety Industrial Trucks, internal combustion Engine pow-
ered. 

ii.  UL 583, Standard for Safety Electric– Battery powered Trucks. 

 

6.1.8.  Fuel Delivery Nozzles 

i. 

Section 19 A of UL 842, Standard for Valves for Flammable Fluids. 

 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1048 of 1348Chapter 14 
UTILITY OCCUPANCIES 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1049 of 1348In this Chapter: 
Î Fire Safety for Substations 
Î Fire Safety for Waste Water Treatment Stations Station 
Î Fire Safety for District Cooling Stations/Cooling Towers 
Î Fire Safety for GSM Switching Station 

Intent of the Chapter 

• 

To provide minimum requirements of fire and life safety to utility occupancies 
such  as  Substation,  Pumping  Station,  Sewage  Treatment  Facilities,  Cooling 
Towers,  and  Telephone  Switching  Stations 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1050 of 1348 

In this Chapter : 

Intent of the Chapter 

  To provide minimum requirements of fire and life safety 

to utility occupancies such as Substation, Pumping 
Station, Sewage Treatment Facilities, Cooling Towers, 
and Telephone Switching Stations 

 

  Fire Safety for Solar generation 

and Substations 

  Fire Safety for Waste Water 
Treatment Stations Station 

  Fire Safety for District Cooling 

Stations/Cooling Towers 

  Fire Safety for GSM Switching 

Station 

1. Definitions 

1.1. General 

It is a mandatory requirement by Civil Defence. 

It is a suggested requirement recommended by Civil Defence but not mandatory. 

Approved and registered by individual Emirates’ Civil Defence material department. 

V X I = W. 
 
Where V is voltage—Voltage—The electromotive force or potential difference, meas-
ured in volts. Voltage is the “pressure” that pushes an electrical charge through a con-
ductor. 
I is Amperage or Current—The amount of electrical charge flowing past a given point 
per unit of time, measured in amperes or amps. Amperage is the measure of electri-
cal current flow. 
W is Wattage— The rate at which an appliance uses electrical energy. Wattage is con-
sidered the amount of work done when one ampere at one volt flows through con-
ductor having one ohm of resistance. 

1.1.1.  Shall  
 
 
1.1.2.  Should 
 
 
1.1.3.  Listed 
 
 
1.1.4.  Watts  
 
 
 

 

 

 
  

 

 
 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1051 of 13481.2. Substation 

 
1.2.1.  High Voltage Direct Current (HVDC) Converter Station  
 

A facility that functions as an electrical rectifier (ac-dc) or an inverter (dc-ac) to con-
trol and transmit power in a high voltage network. There are two types of HVDC 
valves — the mercury arc valve and the present-day technology solid state thyristor 
valve. Both types of valves present a fire risk due to high voltage equipment that con-
sists of oil-filled converter transformers, wall bushings, and capacitors in addition to 
various polymeric components. 

 
1.2.2.  Substation 
 

A substation is used to change AC voltages from one level to another (Step-up or 
step-down), and/or change alternating current to direct current or direct current to 
alternating current. It is used to switch generators, equipment, and circuits or lines in 
and out of a system. Some substations are small with little more than a transformer 
and associated switches. Others are very large with several transformers and dozens 
of switches and other equipment.   

 
1.2.3.  Transformer (Power Transformer) 
 

A transformer is used to raise (Step-up) or lower (Step-down) the voltage as required 
to serve through distribution or transmission lines/circuits. 

 
1.2.4.  Capacitor Bank  
 

Capacitance of conductors and dielectrics that permits the storage of electricity when 
potential difference exists between the conductors. Its value is expressed as the ratio 
of quantity of electricity to a potential difference. A capacitance value is always posi-
tive. An array of capacitors connected into a circuit. Capacitors are used to control 
voltages supplied to the customer by eliminating the voltage drop in the system 
caused by inductive reactive loads. 

 
1.2.5.  Current Transformer  
 

can be used to supply information for measuring power flows and the electrical in-
puts for the operation of protective relays associated with the transmission and distri-
bution circuits or for power transformers. These current transformers have the prima-
ry winding connected in series with the conductor carrying the current to be meas-
ured or controlled. The secondary winding is thus insulated from the high voltage and 
can then be connected to low-voltage metering circuits. 

 
1.2.6.  High Voltage Underground Cables  
 

High Voltage Underground Cables are constructed in many different ways, but are 
usually shielded cables. They are made with a conductor, conductor-strand shielding, 
insulation, semi-conducting insulation shielding, metallic insulation shielding, and a 
sheath. The sheath can be metallic and may then serve as the metallic insulation 
shielding and be covered with a nonmetallic jacket to protect the sheath. This sheath 
helps to reduce or eliminate inductive reactance. Such cables are commonly used in 
circuits operating at 2400 volts or higher 

 
 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1052 of 13481.2. Substation 

 
1.2.7.  Control Room  
 

The substation room contains switchboard panels, supervisory control/SCADA equip-
ment, power-line carrier, meters, and relays. The control room provides all weather 
protection and security for the control equipment.  

 
1.2.8.  Battery Room  
 

Batteries are used in the substation control house as a backup to power the control 
systems in case of a power blackout. These batteries are stored in dedicated and ven-
tilated Battery room. 

Battery charger rooms house the battery charging equipment and controls. 

 
1.2.9.  Battery Charger Room  
 
 
1.2.10. Shunt Reactor  
 

Shunt Reactors are used in an extra high-voltage substation to neutralize inductive 
reactance in long EHV transmission lines . 

 
1.2.11. Switchgear 
 

Switchgear can be either for outdoor use or indoor use. An outdoor metal-clad 
switchgear is a weatherproof housing for circuit breakers, protective relays, meters, 
current transformers, potential transformers, bus conductors, and other equipment. 
An indoor switchgear must be protected from the environment and contains the 
same types of equipment as the outdoor type. 

 
1.2.12. Cable Spread Area 
 

Area populated with High voltage cables penetrating walls and floors, connecting the 
equipment, transformers, switchgear, control equipment and distribution network. 

 
1.2.13. Transmission Bus 
 

Transmission bus are steel structure arrays of switches used to route power into a 
substation.  

 
1.2.14.  Distribution Bus 
 

Distribution bus are steel structure arrays of switches used to route power out of a 
substation. 

 
1.2.15.  Circuit Breakers 
 

A circuit breaker is an automatically-operated electrical switch designed to protect 
high voltage electrical circuit from damage caused by overload or short circuit. Its 
basic function is to detect a fault condition and, by interrupting continuity, to imme-
diately discontinue electrical flow. Unlike a fuse, which operates once and then has 
to be replaced, a circuit breaker can be reset (either manually or automatically) to 
resume normal operation.  

 
 1.2.16.  Ring Main Unit Room (RMU) 
 

A room housing Ring Main Units. RMU is a totally sealed, gas-insulated compact 
switchgear unit. The primary switching devices can be either switch disconnectors 
or fused switch disconnectors or circuit breakers. Different combinations of these 
primary switching devices within the unit are commonly used.  

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1053 of 1348 

1.3. Solar Power Generation 

 
1.3.1.  Solar Energy  
 

Energy emitted by the sun in the form of electromagnetic energy. Solar energy is gen-
erally understood to mean any energy made available by the capture and conversion 
of solar radiation. 

The basic photovoltaic device that generates electricity when exposed to light. 

 
1.3.2.  Solar Cell or Photovoltaic (PV) Cell  
 
 
1.3.3.  Absorber  
 

Component of a solar collector for absorbing radiant energy and transferring this en-
ergy as heat into a fluid. 

 
1.3.4.  Aperture  
 

Solar collector opening through which unconcentrated solar radiation is admit-
ted. 

 
1.3.5.  Photovoltaic Module  
 

Complete and environmentally protected assembly of interconnected photovoltaic 
cells. 

 
1.3.6.  Solar Energy System  
 

Assembly of components that produce and supply electricity by the conversion of so-
lar energy 

 
1.3.7.  Array 
 

Assembly of mechanically integrated and electrically interconnected PV modules, PV 
panels or PV sub-arrays and its support structure. A PV array does not include its 
foundation, tracking apparatus, thermal control, and other such components.  

 
1.3.8.  Panel  
 

A collection of modules mechanically fastened together, wired, and designed to pro-
vide a field-installable unit . 

 
1.3.9.  Inverter 
 

Equipment that is used to change voltage level or waveform, or both, of electrical en-
ergy. Commonly, an inverter *also known as a power conditioning unit (PCU) or power 
conversion system (PCS)+ is a device that changes dc input to an ac output. Inverters 
may also function as battery chargers that use alternating current from another 
source and convert it into direct current for charging batteries.  

 
1.3.10. Interactive System 
 

A solar photovoltaic system that operates in parallel with and may deliver power to 
an electrical production and distribution network. For the purpose of this definition, 
an energy storage subsystem of a solar photovoltaic system, such as a battery, is not 
another electrical production source. 

 
1.3.11. Building Integrated Photovoltaics 
 

Photovoltaic cells, devices, modules, or modular materials that are integrated into 
the outer surface or structure of a building and serve as the outer protective surface 
of that building. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1054 of 1348 

 

1.4. Waste Water Treatment and Collection (Sewage Treatment)  

Facilities 

 
1.4.1.  Industrial Waste  
 

Generally liquid, solid, or gaseous wastes originating from the manufacture of specific 
products. 

 
1.4.2.  Domestic Wastewater  
 

Wastewater derived principally from sources such as dwellings, commercial establish-
ments, and institutions, that might or might not contain small amounts of groundwa-
ter, surface water, or storm water. Wastewater is principally the spent water supply 
of the community. It is used to flush and transport human wastes and the liquid 
wastes of commerce, industry, and institutions. Groundwater, surface water, and 
storm water might also be present. The primary purposes of wastewater treatment 
are to protect the health and well-being of the community and the quality of the re-
ceiving waterway. 

 
1.4.3.  Residential Wastewater  
 
 
1.4.4.  Wastewater Treatment  
 

Wastewater derived from areas consisting of single- and multiple-family residences. 

The first major treatment in a wastewater treatment plant, generally consisting of 
screening, comminution or grinding, grit removal, sedimentation, skimming, or any 
combination of such unit processes. The second step in treatment is biological oxida-
tion using activated sludge or trickling filtration followed by clarification. 

 
1.4.5.  Sludge  
 

A semiliquid mass of accumulated settled solids deposited from raw or treated 
wastewater in tanks or basins; also referred to as biosolids. 

 
1.4.6.  Industrial Sewer  
 

A sewer intended to receive only industrial wastewater or other liquid or water-
carried wastes that is located on a private property, owned and operated to carry in-
dustry-specific contaminants, and properly treated to federal and state requirements 
before direct discharge or receives proper pre-treatment in accordance with federal 
or state requirements before discharge to a municipal sewer system. 

 
1.4.7.  Building Sewer 
 

In plumbing, a sewer that consists of the extension from the building drain to the 
public sewer or other place of disposal; also called house connection or lateral. 

 
1.4.8.  Sanitary Sewer  
 

A sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial 
buildings, industrial plants, and institutions together with minor quantities of storm 
water, surface water, and groundwater that are not admitted intentionally 

 
1.4.9.  Incineration 
 

Combustion or controlled burning of volatile organic matter in sludge and solid waste 
that reduces the volume of the material while producing heat, dry inorganic ash, and 
gaseous emissions 

 
 
 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1055 of 13481.4. Waste Water Treatment and Collection Facilities 

 
1.4.10.  Sedimentation 
 

The unit process of subsidence of suspended matter carried by water, wastewater, 
or other liquids by gravity 

 
1.4.11.  Oxygen enriched atmosphere  
 

Air atmospheres containing more than 23.5 percent oxygen by volume at one 
standard atmosphere pressure 

 
1.4.12.  Hydrogen Sulfide (H2S)  
 

A toxic and lethal gas produced in sewers and digesters by anaerobic decomposition 
of wastewater solids or other anaerobic wastewater or sludge treatment processes 

 
1.4.13.  Methane  (CH4) 
 

A colorless, odorless, flammable gaseous hydrocarbon present in natural gas and 
formed by the anaerobic decomposition of organic matter. 

 
1.4.14.  Anaerobic Digestion  
 

A unit process designed to biologically convert organic matter (sludge) through the 
action of microorganisms in the absence of elemental oxygen 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1056 of 1348 
1.5.3.  Counter Flow Cooling Tower  
 
 
1.5.4.  Cross Flow Cooling Tower  
 

 
1.5.5.  Mechanical Draft Cooling Tower 
 
 
1.5.6.  Natural Draft Cooling Tower  
 

A cooling tower classification in which the airflow is essentially perpendicular to the 
flow of water 

A cooling tower classification in which air movement depends on fans or blowers. 

1.5. District Cooling Facilities and Cooling Towers 

 
1.5.1.  Cooling Tower 
 

A cooling tower is a heat rejection device, which extracts waste heat to the atmos-
phere though the cooling of a water stream to a lower temperature. The type of 
heat rejection in a cooling tower is termed "evaporative" in that it allows a small 
portion of the water being cooled to evaporate into a moving air stream to provide 
significant cooling to the rest of that water stream 

 
1.5.2.  District Cooling 
 

District cooling is the centralized production and distribution of cooling energy. 
Chilled water is delivered via an underground insulated pipeline to office, industrial 
and residential buildings to cool the indoor air of the buildings within a district 

A cooling tower classification in which the water flows countercurrent to the airflow 

A cooling tower containing no fans or blowers, in which air movement depends on 
the difference in densities of the heated air inside the tower and the cooler air out-
side 

 
1.5.7.  Cell  
 

The smallest tower subdivision that can function as an independent unit with re-
gard to air and water flow. 

 
 
1.5.8.  Fire Resistant Partition 
 

A tight, continuous partition suitable for use in a cooling tower environment that 
has a fire resistance rating of 20 minutes or more. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1057 of 1348 

2.  Fire and Life Safety of Utility Occupancies 

 

2.1.  Substations 

 
2.1. 1. General 

 

2.1.1.1.  The provisions of this chapter specify the Fire and Life Safety requirements for 

Substations. 

 
2.1.1.2.  All kinds of substations perform one or combinations of the following functions.                  

a. Change voltage from one level to the other, up or down.                                                               
b. Regulate voltage to compensate for system voltage changes.                                                  
c. Switch transmission and distribution lines into and out of the grid system.                          
d. Measure electric power qualities flowing into the circuits.                                                          
e. Connect communication signals to the circuits                                                                                 
f. Eliminate lightning and other electrical surges from the system                                               
g. Connect electric power generating 
plants to the system.                                                             
h. Make interconnections between the 
electric systems of more than one utili-
ty.                             i. Control reactive 
kilovolt-amperes supplied to and the 
flow of reactive kilovolt-ampere in the 
circuits. 

Did You Know? 

Substation fires mainly 

depend on equipment and 

systems used. Following 

 
2.1.1.3.  The fire incidents and risk of fires in 
substations locally in the UAE and in-
ternationally have been very low.  

 
2.1.1.4.  However, facility has potential fire haz-
ards and the impact of fire can be cata-
strophic, severely affecting the power 
supply to citizens, damage to personal 
and neighboring property and assets.  

 
2.1.1.5.  Though most of the substations are 

unmanned, fire can cost lives of utility 
personnel, Civil Defence personnel, 
contracting personnel and even general 
public, when fire grows.  

are the major fire initiat-

ing components.  

Oil-insulated transform-

ers, Combustible insula-

tion and jackets of cables, 

Oil-insulated cables, Hy-

drogen cooled conden-

sers, Batteries, DC 

Valves, Poor Housekeep-

ing. 

 
2.1.1.6.  Fire and Life Safety requirements in this chapter are minimum guidelines. It is 
consultant’s responsibility to follow utility provider’s material specifications,  
risk assessments of individual facilities and further requirements of referenced 
documents of 2.1.1.7.  

 
2.1.1.7.  This chapter is based on the guidelines of NFPA 850, NFPA  820, NFPA 214, 

OSHA, IEEE (Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers), SEIA (Solar Ener-
gy Industries Association), Fire Protection Research Foundation, MASDAR, 
DEWA Solar Energy guidelines and ADDC guidelines. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1058 of 1348 

2.1. 2. Substations - Fire and Life Safety Requirements  

 

2.1.2.1.  The Fire Detection and Life Safety requirements for substation shall be as per 

Table 14.1. 

Table 14.1: Fire Detection and Life Safety Requirements for Substations 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  CONSTRUCTION  1.  TYPE OF CONSTRUCTION 

 
i.  The Substation building shall be of Fire Resistant construction equivalent to 

Type I (443) as per Chapter 1. 

 
2.  COMPARTMENTATION 
 
i.  Every room of the substation building shall be a 2 hour fire resistance rated 

separate compartment. 

ii.  Battery rooms, relay rooms, switchgear room, control room, cable spreading 
room, GIS room shall be separate compartments from each other, of 2 hour 
fire resistance rating. 

iii. Battery rooms shall be separate from battery charger rooms with 2 hour fire 

resistance rated compartments. 

iv. Fire pump room shall be separated from all other areas by 2 hour fire re-

sistance rated compartment. 

v.  Offices shall be separated from rest of the areas by 2 hour fire resistance rated 

compartment. 

vi. Transformers, capacitors located adjacent to substation building shall be sepa-

rated from the main building by 2 hour fire resistance rated walls. 

 
3.  OUTDOOR OIL INSULATED TRANSFORMERS 
 
i.  Power capacitor units located outdoor, which contain a combustible dielectric 
fluid, should be a minimum of 3m from any structure or building having no fire 
resistive rating.  

ii.  Outdoor oil insulated transformers containing 500 gal. or more of oil, shall be 

separated from adjacent structures and from each other by 2 hour fire re-
sistance rated walls. 

iii. Such a fire wall separating oil insulated transformers shall be designed to with-

stand the effects of exploding transformer bushings or lightening arrestors. 

iv. Where outdoor transformers are not separated by fire walls, they shall be sep-

arated from any structure by a distance as per Table 14.1.a. 

v.  As a minimum, the firewall should extend at least 0.3 m above the top of the 

transformer casing and oil conservator tank and at least 0.61 m beyond the 
width of the transformer and cooling radiators.  

 

Table 14.1.a.: Separation distance of Oil insulated transformers from structures 

TRANSFORMER OIL  
CAPACITY 

MINIMUM DISTANCE WITHOUT FIRE WALL (X) 

1.  LESS THAN 500 GAL. 

i.  Oil spill containment basin shall be 1.5 m away from any structure. 

2. 500 GAL—5000 GAL 

3. MORE THAN 5000 GAL. 
 

i.  7.6 m 

i.  15.2 m 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1059 of 1348 

 

 

 

Figure 14.1.:  Outdoor Transformer Separation Distances and Fire Wall Line of Sight 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1060 of 1348 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1061 of 1348 

 

 

ITEMS 

Table 14.1: Fire Detection and Life Safety Requirements for Substations 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  CONSTRUCTION  4.  INDOOR OIL INSULATED TRANSFORMERS 

 
i.  Capacitor units located indoors, which contain flammable dielectric fluid, 

should be separated from adjacent areas by a 3 hour fire resistance rated barri-
er. 

ii.  If transformer is to be indoors, dry type (Air cooled) transformers are recom-

mended to be installed indoors. 

iii. When an oil filled equipment or transformer is installed indoors, it should be 

installed in transformer /Capacitor vault or room.  

iv. Oil insulated transformers having more than 100 gal oil capacity shall be sepa-
rated from adjacent areas by 3 hour fire resistance rated fire barriers without 
fire suppression system and 1 hour fire resistance rated fire barriers if protect-
ed with automatic fire suppression as per Table 14.1.b. 

v.  Oil insulated transformers having a rating more than 35 kV shall be separated 
from adjacent areas by 3 hour fire resistance rated fire barriers without auto-
matic fire suppression system and 1 hour fire resistance rated fire barriers if 
protected with automatic fire suppression as per Table 14.1.b. 

vi. Where multiple oil insulated transformers having more than 100 gal oil capacity 
are installed adjacent to each other in group, the group shall be separated from 
adjacent areas by 3 hour fire resistance rated fire barrier and automatic fire 
suppression shall be provided as per Table 14.1.b. 

 
5.  OIL CIRCUIT BREAKERS 
 
i.  Oil circuit breakers are recommended to be installed outdoors. 
ii.  If circuit breakers are to be indoors, it is recommended to be dry type or gas-

cooled circuit breakers. 

 
6.  SPILL AND DRAINAGE 
 
i.  Transformer vaults or rooms, Cable spreading rooms, basements and cable tun-
nels should be provided with adequate fixed drainage arrangement, preferably 
with fixed sump and piping. 

ii.  Special precautions should be taken to collect and contain the oil for Oil filled 
equipment and oil filled transformers by providing Yard stone, Bern, holding 
tanks or curb around equipment, or pits. 

iii. The substation grading must be contoured to permit the oil to flow to an area 

that will not affect or endanger other equipment or areas. 

iv. The discharge from any oil pressure relief device should be directed away from 

any nearby equipment to prevent from the splashing of flaming oil. 

v.  Equipment protected with water suppression systems shall also be pro-

vided with drainage systems to prevent flooding. 

2. FIRE STOPPING 

i.  Every penetration in the substation building shall be sealed and fire stopped 

with approved and listed material as per Chapter 1 Section 3. 

ii.  Cable penetrations,  equipment penetrations, piping and duct penetrations and 
all openings in fire barriers shall be provided with approved and listed fire stop-
ping systems as per Chapter 1, Section 3.  

iii. Fire barriers shall also be provided with Fire dampers where ducts are pene-

trating to maintain the fire rating and integrity of the fire barrier. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1062 of 1348 

 

Table 14.1: Fire Detection and Life Safety Requirements for Substations 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

3.  FIRE DOORS 

i.  All doors located in fire barriers, all doors opening into exit corridor, doors in 

the stairs shall be fire-rated and shall comply with requirements of Chapter 
1,  Table 1.10. 

ii.  All doors located in exterior walls or 3 hour fire barrier vaults, doors shall be 

3 hour fire-resistance rated as per Chapter 1,  Table 1.10. 

iii.  All doors between compartments shall be self-closing and Panic hardware 

shall be provided on all exit doors. 

4. FIRE ACCESS 

i.  Fire access shall be provided for the substation as per Chapter 2.                      

Fire Access. 

ii.  Minimum of 6 m of road access having capacity to carry fire apparatus 

weight as per Chapter 2, shall be ensured in remote, rural and desert areas. 

5. MEANS OF EGRESS  i.  Minimum of 2 exits shall be available from each compartment except stor-

age, offices and roof. 

ii.  Basement s and Cable spreading areas’ stairs and exits shall discharge direct-

ly outside the building at ground floor. 

iii.  50% of building exits shall discharge directly outside. 
iv.  Basements and Cable spread areas, battery rooms, indoor transformer 

rooms  shall have a maximum travel distance of 23 m, to the exit. 

v.  Control rooms, offices, switchgear rooms, battery charger rooms, HV and LV 

rooms shall have maximum travel distance of 60 m, to the exit. 

vi.  Commonpath of travel anywhere in the building shall not exceed 15 m. 
vii.  There shall be no dead end anywhere in the building. Exits shall be arranged 

remotely at opposite directions. 

viii. Batteries, relay and control panels, equipment in the substation shall be ar-

ranged such that minimum of 1200 mm exit access width is available be-
tween such arrangements or between equipment and wall. 

ix.  Means of egress requirements, dimensions, specifications not mentioned in 

this section shall comply with Chapter 3. Means of Egress. 

1.  OFFICES, CORRIDORS 
 
i.  Fire extinguishers shall be provided as per Chapter 4. Table 4.3.1. 
 
2.  LV ROOMS, TELEPHONE ROOMS, CONTROL ROOMS, SWTCHGEAR ROOMS, 
RMU ROOMS 
 
i.  Fire extinguishers shall be provided as per Chapter 4. Table 4.3.4. 
 
3.  HV ROOM 
 
i.  Fire extinguishers shall be provided as per Chapter 4. Table 4.3.5. 
 
4.  TRANSFORMER (DRY TYPE) ROOM 
 
i.  Fire extinguishers shall be provided as per Chapter 4. Table 4.3.5. 

6.  FIRE                     
EXTINGUISHERS 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1063 of 1348 

 

 

ITEMS 

Table 14.1: Fire Detection and Life Safety Requirements for Substations 

REQUIREMENTS 

7.  EXIT SIGNS 

i.  Exit and Directional signs shall be provided at all exit doors and corridors in ac-

cordance with Chapter 5. Section 3. 

ii.  Photoluminescent Exit and Directional signs shall be provided at all exit doors 

and exit access at basements and cable spread areas in accordance with Chapter 
5. Table 5.1.4. 

iii.  Evacuation plans shall be provided at control room, basements and cable spread 

areas in accordance with Chapter 5. Table 5.1.8. 

iv.  Adequate WARNING signs regarding electric shocks, thermal shock impacts, use 

of inappropriate Fire Extinguishing media, precise identification of breeching 
inlets for particular water system etc. shall be provided throughout the facility.  

8.  EMERGENCY 

i.  Monitored type Emergency lighting shall be provided throughout the substation 

LIGHTING 

in accordance with Chapter 6. Section 3.3. 

ii.  Outdoor type High intensity monitored emergency lighting shall be provided 

near the outdoor transformers, capacitors and fire pump room, in accordance 
with Chapter 6. Section 3.3. 

iii.  Battery room Emergency Exit Lights shall be explosion proof. 

9.  VOICE                           

NOT REQUIRED 

EVACUATION  
SYSTEM 

10.  FIRE ALARM  

1.  BATTERY CHARGER ROOM, CONTROL ROOM, CEILING VOIDS, FLOOR VOID, 

SYSTEM 

 

COMMUNICATION ROOM,  RMU ROOM,  SWITCHGEAR ROOM, RELAY ROOM, 
LV/MV/HV ROOM 

 
i.  Aspiration Type Air Sampling Smoke Detection System shall be provided as per 

Chapter 8. Section  4.5. OR point type Optical smoke detection shall be provided 
in accordance with Chapter 8. Section  4.3.  

 
2.  BATTERY ROOM 
 
i.  Heat Detection and Alarm System shall be provided as per Chapter 8.               

Section 4.7.  

ii.  Flame Detection and Alarm System shall be provided as per Chapter 8.              

Section 4.9.  

iii.  (In addition, listed Hydrogen detectors shall be provided to monitor the Hydro-

gen levels and to be interfaced with battery room exhaust fan) 

 
3.  CABLE SPREADING ROOM, CABLE BASEMENT, CABLE TUNNEL, CABLE TRENCH-

ES 

 
i.  Aspiration Type Air Sampling Smoke Detection System shall be provided for the 

ceiling as per Chapter 8. Section  4.5. 

ii.  Linear Type Heat Detection System shall be provided on the cable trays as per 

Chapter 8. Section 4.8. 

 
4.     INDOOR OIL FILLED TRANSFORMER ROOM 
 
i.  Multisensors specifically listed for purpose shall be provided as per                 

Chapter 8. Table 8.12.1. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1064 of 1348 

 

Table 14.1: Fire Detection and Life Safety Requirements for Substations 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

10.  FIRE ALARM  

SYSTEM 

5.  OUTDOOR OIL FILLED TRANSFORMER VAULTS 
 
i.  Flame (Radiant Energy) Detection and Alarm System shall be provided as per    

Chapter 8. Section 4.9.  

ii.  Probe type Heat detectors shall be provided as per Chapter 8. Section  4.7.  
 
6.   AHU ROOM 
 
i.  Multi-sensors shall be provided as per Chapter 8. Table 8.12.1.  
 
7.   FIRE PUMP ROOM 
 
i.  Heat Detection and Alarm System shall be provided as per Chapter 8.                 

Section 4.7.  

 
8.    OFFICES, CORRIDORS, STORAGE 
 
i.  Smoke Detection and Alarm System shall be provided as per Chapter 8.                 

Section 4.3.  

1.  BATTERY ROOM 
 
i.  Ventilation fan shall be provided for the room calculated as per Chapter 6.     
Table 6.2.3., to keep the Hydrogen concentration below 1%. Ventilation fans 
shall be interfaced with Hydrogen detection. 

 
2.  CONTROL ROOM, BATTERY CHARGER ROOM, SWITCHGEAR ROOM 
 
i.  Smoke ventilation shall be provided as per Chapter 10. Utilizing building HVAC 
system to achieve the required smoke ventilation shall be permitted and shall 
be designed with motorized dampers and fire rated ducts as per Chapter 10. 

ii.  Room normal air-conditioning shall be such that it creates positive differential 

pressure compared to outside areas to prevent sensitive equipment damage 
from smoke infiltration from neighbouring areas. 

 
3.     CABLE SPREADING ROOM, CABLE BASEMENT 
 
i.  Smoke extraction with fire rated ducts and dedicated extract fans shall be pro-

vided as per Chapter 10. 

11. SMOKE    

VENTILATION 
SYSTEM 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1065 of 1348 

2.1.2.2.  The Fire Protection for 33/11 kV or higher Primary Substation shall comply with Chapter 9 

and  Table 14.1.b. 

Table 14.1.b: Fire Protection Requirements for 33/11 kV or higher Primary Substations 

OCCUPANCY 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

1.  OFFICE 
2.  CORRIDOR 
3.  STORAGE 
4.  FIRE PUMP ROOM 
5.  CIRCULATION AREAS 
6.  HVAC ROOM 

i.  Sprinklers shall be provided as per 

Chapter 9. Section 3.5. 

ii.  Sprinkler design densities shall be 

for as per Chapter 9. 

iii.  Dry riser + Hose Reel/Rack System 
shall be provided throughout the 
substation building, as per Chap-
ter 9. Section 3.2 and Section 3.3. 
iv.  Separate breeching inlets shall be 

provided for sprinkler system, 
landing valves, water spray sys-
tems and labeled clearly. 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP 
AND WATER TANK      
CAPACITY 

v.  Capacity of the combined 
fire pump set for Deluge 
Water Spray, automatic 
sprinkler system, wet riser 
system and yard hydrant 
system shall be 750 gpm 
at pressure as required to 
satisfy 6.9 bar at the most 
remote Landing valve. 

vi.  Fire pump selection, de-

sign, installation and 
maintenance shall be as 
per Chapter 9. 

7.  OIL FILLED                    

i.  Automatic Deluge Water Spray as 

iii.   Water tank shall have ca-

TRANSFORMERS WITH 
MORE THAN 500 GAL   
(1890 L) OIL CAPACITY 
(INDOOR OR OUTDOOR) 

8.  CABLE SPREAD AREAS 

per Chapter 9. Section 3.8. shall 
be provided. 

pacity of 60 minutes of 
operation, complete with 
low water level detection 
and instantaneous refilling 
arrangement. 

iv.  Water tank shall comply 

with requirements of 
Chapter 9. 

9.    CABLE TUNNELS 

i.  Automatic Deluge Water Spray as 

v.    Where water mist is opted 

per Chapter 9. Section 3.8. shall 
be provided. 

OR  
 
i.  Automatic Water Mist System, as 
per Chapter 9. Section 3.10. shall 
be provided. 

to be installed to protect 
Cable tunnels, capacity of 
the fire pump set for Wa-
ter Mist shall be as per 
Manufacturer’s specifica-
tion and approved design 
and installation guideline. 

10. SUBSTATION YARD 

i.  Yard Fire Hydrants shall be provid-
ed as per Chapter 9. Section 3.11., 
in a loop to cover the entire area. 

 

i.  Clean Agent system shall be provided as per Chapter 9. Section 

3.14.  

i.  No Requirement 

11. CONTROL ROOM 
12.  BATTERY CHARGER ROOM 
13.  RMU ROOM 
14.  LV/MV ROOM 
15.  COMMUNICATION ROOM 
16.  CABLE TRENCHES 
17.  INDOOR CAPACITOR BANK 

18. SWITCHGEAR ROOM 
19. DRY TRANSFORMERS 
20. OIL FILLED TRANSFORMERS 

WITH LESS THAN 500 GAL 
OIL CAPACITY 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1066 of 1348 

2.1.2.3.  The Fire Protection for 22/0.4 kV or 11/0.4 kV or lower distribution Substation shall com-

ply with Chapter 9 and  Table 14.1.c. 

Table 14.1.c: Fire Protection Requirements for 22/0.4 kV or 11/0.4 kV or lower distribution Substations 

OCCUPANCY 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

i.  No Requirements 

1.  OFFICE 
2.  CORRIDOR 
3.  STORAGE 
4.  FIRE PUMP ROOM 
5.  CIRCULATION AREAS 
6.  HVAC ROOM 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP 
AND WATER TANK      
CAPACITY 

ii.  Capacity of the combined 
fire pump set for Deluge 
Water Spray and wet riser 
system shall be 500 gpm 
at pressure as required to 
satisfy 6.9 bar at the most 
remote Landing valve. 

iii.  Fire pump selection, de-

sign, installation and 
maintenance shall be as 
per Chapter 9. 

7.  OIL FILLED                    

i.  Automatic Deluge Water Spray as 

iii.   Water tank shall have ca-

TRANSFORMERS WITH 
MORE THAN 500 GAL   
(1890 L) OIL CAPACITY 
(INDOOR OR OUTDOOR) 

 

per Chapter 9. Section 3.8. shall 
be provided. 

pacity of 60 minutes of 
operation, complete with 
low water level detection 
and instantaneous refilling 
arrangement. 

iv.  Water tank shall comply 

with requirements of 
Chapter 9. 

8. DRY TRANSFORMERS 

i.  No Requirements 

9.   CABLE TUNNELS 

i.  No Requirements 

10. SUBSTATION YARD 

i.  No Requirements. 

 

 

 

i.  No Requirements 

i.  No Requirement 

11. CONTROL ROOM 
12.  BATTERY CHARGER ROOM 
13.  RMU ROOM 
14.  LV/MV/HV ROOM 
15.  COMMUNICATION ROOM 
16.  CABLE TRENCHES 

17. SWITCHGEAR ROOM 
18. DRY TRANSFORMERS 
19. OIL FILLED TRANSFORMERS 

WITH LESS THAN 500 GAL 
OIL CAPACITY 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1067 of 1348 

2.2.  Solar Power Generation Systems 

 

2.2.1. General 

 

 

2.2.1.1.  The major concerns of Solar System Fire safety arises from the solar cells itself. 

Poor installation and connections to inverter might cause a fire.  

2.2.1.2.  Where fires are triggered in the vicinity of solar product installation, concern in 

the industry is the reaction of solar products to fire and its impact on flame 
spread and toxic smoke emission. 

 
2.2.1.3.  When solar products are under fire, the toxic product of combustion is a con-

cern to fire fighters, combating the fire.  

 
2.2.1.4.  Hence, solar cells or product approval to international standards is of prime 

requirement, which along with the weather and energy performance, also as-
sess flame spread characters and toxicity of product of combustion  of the prod-
uct.  

 
2.2.1.5.  All solar products shall be Civil Defence listed and approved. See Section 2.2.4. 

for material approval. 

 
2.2.1.6.  Solar or PV façade systems installation, thermal barrier requirements, fire 

breaks etc. shall be in accordance with Chapter 1, Section 4. and appropriate 
additional large scale façade tests and engineering analysis may also be re-
quired. 

 
2.2.2. Hazards to Fire Fighters 

 

2.2.2.1.  Solar energy systems on fire consist of following hazards for the fire fighters.                                  

a. Trip and Slipping, if installed on roofs/sloped roofs                                                                                                                             
b. Structural collapse due to Extra weight                                                                                
c. Flame Spread on panels, spreading to interior and façade.                                                                                                         
d. Inhalation of toxic products of combustion                                                                               
e. Electrical Shock                                                                                                                                  
f. Battery emissions, explosions and in addition, 
g. Hot Fluids if the system is thermal. 

 

Figure 14.2.:  Solar Energy System Components 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1068 of 1348 

2.2.3. Solar Power Generation Systems– Fire and Life Safety 

 
2.2.3.1.  The Fire and Life Safety requirements for Solar Power Generation Systems shall 

be as per Table 14.2. 

 

Table 14.2.: Fire and Life Safety Requirements for Solar Power Generation Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  FLAME SPREAD 

CHARACTERS 

1.  FLAME SPREAD CHARACTERISTICS OF PV CELLS ON ROOF 
 
i.  The minimum requirement for Solar PV cells to be installed on roof of Lowrise 

buildings and Private Villas  is Class B or equivalent class when tested to test 
standards as required by Section 2.2.4. of this chapter. 

ii.  For Midrise, Highrise and Super Highrise buildings, the minimum requirement 

for solar PV cells to be installed on roof is Class A, when tested to test stand-
ards as per Section 2.2.4.  of this chapter. 

iii. Where solar panels are installed on combustible roofs, such combustible roofs 

shall be separated from the solar panels, cabling and installations by non-
combustible material in accordance with Chapter 1. Section 7.1.44. 

 
2.  FLAME SPREAD CHARACTERISTICS OF PV CELLS ON FACADE 
 
i.  The minimum requirement for Solar PV cells to be installed on building façade 

of any building of any occupancy shall be Class A, when tested to test criteria as 
per Section 2.2.4.  of this chapter. 

ii.  When solar panels, PV cells are installed on the façade systems, they shall not 

reduce the structural integrity or the fire resistance rating of the exterior walls. 
iii. The solar panels and PV cells installed on building envelope, shall demonstrate 
through large scale system tests that the building envelope is not altered in its 
fire resistance rating. See Section 2.2.4.  of this chapter for fire test require-
ments. 

2.  CONSTRUCTION  1.  ACCESS 

 
i.  Solar panel installations on roof or on commercial scale as generation plant 

shall provide access to fire fighters around the installations.  

ii.  Minimum of 1.2 m wide access path shall be available around the installations. 
iii. Solar installations on roof shall be such that access and emergency operations 
from first responders and fire fighters operations and maneuvering is not jeop-
ardized. 

iv. Commercial installations on ground such as Solar power plants shall have 6 m 
clear fire access around the installations and in between arrays in full compli-
ance with Chapter 2. Fire Access, taking into account the dead ends, maximum 
distance, turning radius etc. 

 
2.  SECURITY 
 
i.  Commercial Solar Panel installations shall be secured with fence and CCTV 

monitoring to prevent accidental entry of people and animals. Accidental tres-
passing of people and animals into such installations could result in loss of life 
and damage to installations.  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1069 of 1348 

Table 14.2.: Fire and Life Safety Requirements for Solar Power Generation Systems 

 

ITEMS 

 

REQUIREMENTS 

2.  CONSTRUC-

ii.  In domestic installations such as on roofs, facility management should take pre-

TION 

cautions to isolate and restrict access to such areas to prevent accidental tres-
passing of children and people, endangering their lives. 

 
3.  LOCATION 
 
i.  The solar panel installations on roof shall not obstruct the Smoke control system 
(Pressurization system, smoke extract system etc.) equipment and components 
such as air intake openings and fans. Obstructions to smoke control system com-
ponents can severely affect the efficiency and intent of the smoke control strate-
gy of the buildings. 

ii.  Solar panel installations shall not obstruct any building means of egress. 
iii. Solar panel installations shall not obstruct access to LPG Tanks, if any. 
iv. Solar panel installations shall not obstruct building HVAC components. 
 
4.  MEANS OF EGRESS 
 
i.  Other than Private Villas and Commercial Villas, solar installations shall have ac-
cess to two permanent building exit stairs, designed as per Chapter 3. Means of 
Egress. 

ii.  Solar installations having access with temporary ladders, spiral stairs and open 

steel stairs are not acceptable. 

3.  SUBSTATIONS 

i.  Substations, if any, shall comply with Section 2.1. of this chapter. 

4. EQUIPMENT 

i.  Transformers, if any, shall comply with Section 2.1. of this chapter. 
ii.  Inverts shall be listed and approved as per Section  2.2.3.7. 

5.  SYSTEM             

i.  Equipment and the system shall have clear identification label near the control 

IDENTIFICA-
TION 

system or Command Center or reception, stating if the type of solar system is 
“Thermal” or “Photovoltaic” and the associated warning and safety precautions 
to be taken during fire accidents. 

ii.  Solar components release hazardous and toxic elements when they decompose 

in fire. These warning details shall be identified and made visible with warning 
signs. 

iii. Color coding and standard identification of energized parts of solar system shall 

be in place to identify “ON” parts such as electrical wire conduits, panel segments 
etc. 

6. EMERGENCY 
SHUTDOWN 

i. 

ii. 

In large solar power generation installations, adequate module and array level 
isolation (disconnect facilities) shall be provided segment wise strategically. Re-
mote shutdown features of modules and arrays shall be considered to enable 
emergency responders and fire fighters, to safely isolate energized segments 
and successfully execute fire fighting operations. 
In domestic applications, module and array disconnect switches shall be provid-
ed on roof. 

iii.  Disconnect switches for solar system shall be clearly labeled and distinct from 
any other devices such as “Manual Call Points”, “Emergency LPG Shut-off” and 
activation buttons of “Fire suppression systems”. 

iv.  Location of disconnect switches, inverters and arrangement of solar arrays shall 
be depicted in a “Site Layout” plan and shall be posted at key locations such as 
control rooms, emergency command centers, building receptions etc. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1070 of 1348 

 

Table 14.2.: Fire and Life Safety Requirements for Solar Power Generation Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

7.  FIRE DETECTION 

AND ALARM  
SYSTEM 

i.  Fire Detection and Alarm shall be provided to all the ancillary buildings such as 
control room, equipment room, storage room and inverter rooms of the solar 
energy generation plants and commercial installations, in accordance with 
Chapter 8. Fire Detection and Alarm System. 

ii.  Main FACP shall be located in control room with annunciator panel at security 

guard room or main panel shall be located at security guard room. 

8.  FIRE                   

i.  In solar energy generating plants, Fire extinguishers shall be provided through-

EXTINGUISHERS 

out ancillary buildings in accordance with Chapter 4. Fire Extinguishers. 

ii.  Trolley type, wheeled CO2 extinguishers, in accordance with Chapter 4,      

Table 4.3.5., shall be provided at strategic locations throughout large outdoor 
solar panel installations, in an enclosed protected outdoor cabinet. 

iii. One Trolley type, wheeled CO2 extinguisher, in accordance with Chapter 4, 
Table 4.3.5., shall be provided on roof, where solar panels are installed on 
roof. 

iv. Foam Type and Water Type extinguishers shall not be used on solar installa-

tion fires. 

9. FIRE PROTECTION 

SYSTEM 

NOT REQUIRED. However, substations and transformers, if any, shall comply with 
Section 2.1. of this chapter. 

10. WARNING SIGNS  i.  Warning signs shall be provided near all solar system installations, as shown. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1071 of 1348 

 

Table 14.2.: Fire and Life Safety Requirements for Solar Power Generation Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

11. FIRE STRATEGY  1. GENERAL 

 
i.  Preplanned Fire strategy is of utmost important requirement in tackling solar 

power system fires, since it poses additional dangers and hazards to fire fighters 
than the normal fires. 

ii.  The Utility service provider, stake holders, owners, system operators, manufac-

turers and installers shall jointly develop the fire strategy along with Civil De-
fence Operation Department. 

iii. A clear written fire strategy addressing the electrical shock hazard, isolation  of 

panels and arrays, isolation of modules, type of fire fighting agent to be used 
and the method of fire fighting etc. based on the following. 

 
2. KEY ELEMENTS TO BE CONSIDERED IN THE FIRE STRATEGY 
 
i.  Management shall assign responsible and knowledgeable person to coordinate 
with Emergency responders and Civil Defence, who knows hazards and discon-
nection switch locations and methods and who can assist Civil Defence during 
fire emergencies. 

ii.  Photovoltaic panels exposed to sun are always “ON” and hence energized. 
iii.  De-energizing solar panels is almost impossible. So first responders and fire 

fighters should always consider the solar system and its components as 
“energized”. 

iv.  Care should be taken never to cut or damage conduits and equipment and 

should be treated as energized always. 

v.  Facility management  and Utility provider should always be familiar with loca-

tions of disconnection switches scattered all along the vast areas of installa-
tions. 

vi.  If all connections to inverter are not disconnected, the grid will still be live with 

voltages. 

vii.  Battery storage arrangement poses additional threat. Batteries maintain elec-

trical current during night time. Batteries on fire can be explosive and emit haz-
ardous materials, corrosive gases and toxic fumes. 

viii. Appropriate PPE (Personal Protective Equipment) shall be available at all times 

along with respiratory protective equipment (Self-contained Breathing Appa-
ratus), during and post fire clean up activities. 

ix.  Minimum of 5 m distance should be maintained from these equipment while 

fighting fire.  

 
3.   KEY ELEMENTS TO BE CONSIDERED IN THE POST FIRE STRATEGY 
 
i.  During normal operation, solar power components are safe but when during 

fire and under fire solar cells, components are very dangerous in terms on haz-
ardous and toxic materials emitted. 

ii.  Care should be taken to avoid exposure to these exposures during fire and dur-

ing clean up activities. 

iii. New solar technologies in domestic usage are integral part of the building com-
ponents and materials and during fire, the hazardous nature of these materials 
may not be obvious to occupants, first responders and fire fighters. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1072 of 1348 

 

Table 14.2.: Fire and Life Safety Requirements for Solar Power Generation Systems 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

12. TRAINING 

i.  The solar power generation organization, service providers along with manu-

facturers shall regularly conduct training programs and workshops for the 
maintenance contractors, emergency responders and Civil Defence personnel. 

ii.  Training shall concentrate on equipping emergency responders and Civil De-

fence personnel with in-depth knowledge of Solar cells such as                                 
a. Their behavior under fire scenarios                                                                             
b. Burning characteristics                                                                                                   
c. Flame spread, smoke generation, hazardous, corrosive and toxic gases gener-
ated etc.                                                                                                                                 
d. Identification of energized parts of the system                                                        
e. Identification of disconnecting switches and methods                                                       
f. International best practices of solar system fire fighting 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1073 of 13482.2.4. Solar System (Photovoltaic Cell, PV) Material Test Standards 

and Approval. 

 

 

 

2.2.4.1.  Acceptable Test Standards and criteria 

2.2.4.1.1.  All the Materials, Systems, Assemblies, Pipes and fittings, equipment, 

Products and Accessories, referred to in this chapter shall be Listed, Ap-
proved and Registered by the Civil Defence Material Approval Depart-
ment. 

 
2.2.4.1.2.  There is no year of edition mentioned against any test standards. It is 

the intent of Civil Defence to convey to the customers seeking laborato-
ry tests and the test laboratories to follow the “LATEST EDITION OF THE 
TEST STANDARD, AS AND WHEN THEY ARE UPGRADED/REVISED/
AMENDED, TO THE DATE.” 

2.2.4.2.  PV cells (BAPV) to be installed on roof of Lowrise buildings 

 

i.  Class B, with ANSI/UL 1703, Standard for Safety for Flat-Plate Photovoltaic Mod-

ules and Panels. OR 

 ii. CLASS B, with IEC 61730-2, Requirements for PV modules tested under Fire con-

ditions. 

 

2.2.4.3.  PV cells (BAPV) to be installed on roof of Midrise and Highrise buildings 

 

i.  Class A, with ANSI/UL 1703, Standard for Safety for Flat-Plate Photovoltaic Mod-

ules and Panels. OR 

ii.  CLASS A, with IEC 61730-2, Requirements for PV modules tested under Fire con-

ditions. 
 

2.2.4.4.  PV cells Integrated into building (BIPV) material to be installed on roof of 

Midrise and Highrise buildings shall comply with any of the following 

 

i.  Class A, with ANSI/UL 790, Standard for Standard Test Method for Roof Cover-

ings 

ii.  Class A, with ASTM E 108, Standard Test Method of Roof Coverings 
iii. Class A, with NFPA 256, Standard Methods of fire tests of roof coverings 
iv. Class A, with EN 13501-5, Classification using data from external fire exposure 

to roofs. 

v.  Class A, with ISO 13501-5, Classification using data from external fire exposure 

to roofs. 

 

2.2.4.5.  PV cells (BAPV) to be installed on façade of any buildings 

 
i.  Class B, d0, S1, with EN 13501-1, Classification using data from reaction to 

fire tests 

 

2.2.4.6.  PV Systems (BAPV) OR (BIPV), as facade system to be installed on façade 

of any buildings 

 
i.  Shall be tested as per Chapter 1. Table 1.14.a. 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1074 of 1348 

2.2.4.7.  Inverters 

i. 

 
IEC 62109 –1, Safety of power converters for use in photovoltaic power sys-
tems, and IEC 62109 –2, Particular requirements for inverters OR   

ii.  UL 1741, Standard for Inverters, Converters, Controllers and Interconnection 

System Equipment for Use With Distributed Energy Resources 

  

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1075 of 1348 

2.3. Waste Water Treatment and Collection Facilities (Sewage 

Treatment)  

 

 
2.3.1. General 

 

2.3.1.1.  The requirements of this chapter provide minimum fire and life safety guide-
lines for Sewage or wastewater treatment facilities and associated collection 
systems.  

 
2.3.1.2.  The principal elements of wastewater treatment are as follows: a. Preliminary 

treatment b. Primary treatment c. Secondary treatment d. Tertiary treatment e. 
Disinfection e. Sludge treatment. 

 
2.3.1.3.  Preliminary treatment is the conditioning of wastewater as it enters the 

wastewater treatment plant. Preliminary treatment removes materials that 
might be harmful to or might adversely affect the operation of the treatment 
plant. Such material might include lumber, cardboard, rags, stones, sand, plas-
tic, grease, and scum. The methods and equipment used to remove these mate-
rials include bar racks, bar screens, and gravity or aerated grit chambers. 

 
2.3.1.4.  Secondary treatment is intended to reduce the concentrations of the remaining 

suspended solids and the dissolved and colloidal organic matter in the 
wastewater. Such material is not removed to any significant degree in primary 
treatment. A wastewater treatment plant having secondary treatment follow-
ing primary treatment commonly can achieve removal of a total of 90 percent 
of the influent suspended solids and biochemical oxygen demand of the raw 
wastewater. Secondary treatment processes can be either biological or physical
–chemical. 

 
2.3.1.5.  Most municipal secondary treatment processes are biological. These processes 

can be classified as fixed film or suspended growth. In each process, a mixed 
population of microorganisms is established in the presence of oxygen. These 
microorganisms metabolize the dissolved organic matter in the wastewater and 
form a biological mass. The effluent from fixed film or suspended growth pro-
cesses contains suspensions of biological solids. These solids are removed from 
the treated wastewater in a secondary sedimentation tank. 

 
2.3.1.6.  Physical–chemical treatment includes one or more physical–chemical unit pro-
cesses to treat primary effluent. Such processes might include chemical coagu-
lation, precipitation, and filtration to remove suspended matter and activated 
carbon adsorption to remove soluble organics. 

 
2.3.1.7.  Disinfection is necessary to destroy pathogenic bacteria, viruses, and amoebic 
cysts commonly found in wastewater. Disinfection processes can be chemical, 
such as ozonation or chlorination, or physical, such as ultraviolet irradiation. 
Chemical disinfection using chlorine and, infrequently, ozone are the most 
widely used means of wastewater disinfection. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1076 of 1348 

2.3.2. Wastewater Treatment (Sewage Treatment) Facilities - Fire 

and Life Safety 
 
 
2.3.2.1.  The Fire and Life Safety requirements for Wastewater treatment facilities shall 

be as per Table 14.3. 

 

 

2.3.2.2.  The requirements of Table 14.3. are limited to Fire detection, Fire Protection 

and ventilation only. Explosion and electrical classification of the hazard shall be 
evaluated by consultants based on NFPA 820 and relevant standards and regu-
lations of utility service company. 

 

Table 14.3.: Fire and Life Safety Requirements for Wastewater treatment facilities 

HAZARD/
LOCATION 

1. STORM WATER 
PUMPING        
STATION          
(WET WELLS) 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  RISK 
 
i.  Possible ignition of flammable gases and floating flammable liquids. 
 
2.  VENTILATION FOR PROCESS AREAS 
 
i.  Normally Not Ventilated. 
 
3.  FIRE DETECTION 
 
i.  Not required except for ancillary buildings, as per Chapter 8. 
 
4.  FIRE PROTECTION 
 
i.  Not required . 

2. STORM WATER 
PUMPING        
STATION          
(DRY WELLS) 

1.  RISK 
 
i.  Possible ignition of flammable gases and floating flammable liquids. 
 
2.  VENTILATION FOR PROCESS AREAS, IF ENCLOSED 
 
i.  Continuously ventilated providing 6 Air Changes per Hour, in compliance with 

Chapter 10. 

 
3.  FIRE DETECTION 
 
i.  Not required except for ancillary buildings, as per Chapter 8. 
 
4.  FIRE PROTECTION 
 
i.  Fire extinguisher shall be provided as per Chapter 4. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1077 of 1348 

 

Table 14.3.: Fire and Life Safety Requirements for Wastewater treatment facilities 

HAZARD/
LOCATION 

3. RESIDENTIAL 

WASTEWATER 
PUMPING        
STATION          
(WET WELLS) 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  RISK 
 
i.  Possible ignition of flammable gases and floating flammable liquids. 
 
2.  VENTILATION FOR PROCESS AREAS, IF ENCLOSED 
 
i.  Continuously ventilated, providing 12 Air Changes per Hour, in compliance 

with Chapter 10. 

 
3.  FIRE DETECTION 
 
i.  Combustible Gas Detection shall be provided and Fire Detection and Alarm 

System shall be provided for ancillary buildings, as per Chapter 8. 

 
4.  FIRE PROTECTION 
 
i.  Fire extinguisher shall be provided as per Chapter 4. 

4. RESIDENTIAL 

WASTEWATER 
PUMPING        
STATION          
(DRY WELLS) 

1.  RISK 
 
i.  Buildup of  flammable liquid vapors. 
 
2.  VENTILATION FOR PROCESS AREAS, IF ENCLOSED 
 
i.  Continuously ventilated providing 6 Air Changes per Hour, in compliance with 

Chapter 10. 

 
3.  FIRE DETECTION 
 
i.  Not required except for ancillary buildings, as per Chapter 8. 
 
4.  FIRE PROTECTION 
 
i.  Fire extinguisher shall be provided as per Chapter 4. 

5.  ODOR CONTROL 

AND                   
VENTILATION 
SYSTEMS         
SERVING       
CLASSIFIED AREAS 

1.  RISK 
 
i.  Buildup of  flammable liquid vapors. 
 
2.  VENTILATION FOR PROCESS AREAS, IF ENCLOSED 
 
i.  Continuously ventilated providing 6 Air Changes per Hour, in compliance with 

Chapter 10. 

 
3.  FIRE DETECTION 
 
i.  Combustible Gas Detection shall be provided and Fire Detection and Alarm 

System shall be provided for ancillary buildings, as per Chapter 8. 

 
4.  FIRE PROTECTION 
 
i.  Fire extinguisher shall be provided as per Chapter 4. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1078 of 1348 

 

Table 14.3.: Fire and Life Safety Requirements for Wastewater treatment facilities 

HAZARD/
LOCATION 

REQUIREMENTS 

 
3.  FIRE DETECTION, IF ENCLOSED 
 
i.  Combustible Gas Detection shall be provided and Fire Detection and Alarm 

System shall be provided for ancillary buildings, as per Chapter 8. 

 
4.  FIRE PROTECTION 
 
i.  Yard Fire Hydrant shall be provided as per Chapter 9. 
ii.  Fire extinguisher shall be provided as per Chapter 4. 

6.  DIVERSION AND 

 
7.  COARSE AND   

CONTROL     
STRUCTURES 

1.  RISK 
 
i.  Possible ignition of flammable gases and floating flammable liquids. 
 
2.  VENTILATION FOR PROCESS AREAS, IF ENCLOSED 
 
i.  Continuously ventilated, providing 12 Air Changes per Hour, in compliance 
FINE SCREEN             
FACILITIES 

with Chapter 10. 

 
8.  FLOW           

EQUALIZATION 
TANKS 

 
9.  GRIT REMOVAL 

TANKS 

 
10. PRE-AERATION 

TANKS 

 
11. PRIMARY /

SECONDARY / 
INTERMEDIATE 
SEDIMENTATION 
TANKS 

 
12. ANAEROBIC 

TOWERS,        
ANAEROBIC 
FIXED FILM    
SYSTEM 

 
13. GAS HANDLING 

SYSTEMS FOR 
LIQUID        
TREATMENT 
PROCESS 

 
14. FLASH MIXER 

TANKS 

 
15. NITRIFICATION 
AND DENITRIFI-
CATION TANKS 

 
16. BREAKPOINT 

CHLORINATION 
TANKS 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1079 of 1348 

 

Table 14.3.: Fire and Life Safety Requirements for Wastewater treatment facilities 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  RISK 
 
i.  Possible ignition of flammable gases and floating flammable liquids. 
 
2.  VENTILATION FOR PROCESS AREAS, IF ENCLOSED 
 
i.  Continuously ventilated, providing 12 Air Changes per Hour, in compliance 

with Chapter 10. 

 
3.  FIRE DETECTION, IF ENCLOSED 
 
i.  Combustible Gas Detection shall be provided and Fire Detection and Alarm 

System shall be provided for ancillary buildings, as per Chapter 8. 

 
4.  FIRE PROTECTION 
 
i.  Yard Fire Hydrant shall be provided as per Chapter 9. 
ii.  Fire extinguisher shall be provided as per Chapter 4. 

HAZARD/
LOCATION 

17. AMMONIA 
STRIPPING  
TOWERS 

 
18. GRAVITY AND 
PRESSURE      
FILTERS 

 
19. CARBON        
COLUMN OR 
TANKS 

 
20. BACK WASH  
WATER AND 
WASTE        
BACKWASH    
WATER       
HOLDING TANKS 

 
21. ULTRAVIOET  
DISINFECTION 
UNIT 

 
22. EFFLUENT 

STRUCTURES 

 
23. SCUM AND GRIT 

HANDLING 
BUILDINGS 

 
24. SCUM PUMPING 

AREAS 

 
25. SLUDGE      

PUMPING AND 
STORAGE AREAS 

 
26. DEWATERING 

BUILDINGS WITH 
CENTRIFUGES, 
GRAVITY BELT, 
VACCUM        
FILTERS AND FIL-
TER PRESSES 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1080 of 1348 

 

Table 14.3.: Fire and Life Safety Requirements for Wastewater treatment facilities 

HAZARD/
LOCATION 

27. INCINERATORS 
AND                   
INCINERATOR 
BUILDINGS AND 
OPERATIONS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  RISK 
 
i.  Firebox Explosion. 
 
2.  VENTILATION FOR PROCESS AREAS, IF ENCLOSED 
 
i.  Not Applicable 
 
3.  FIRE DETECTION, IF ENCLOSED 
 
i.  Combustible Gas Detection shall be provided and Fire Detection and Alarm 

System shall be provided for ancillary buildings, as per Chapter 8. 

 
4.  FIRE PROTECTION, IF ENCLOSED 
 
i.  Automatic Water Sprinkler/Water Spray/Water Mist shall be provided as per 

Chapter 9. 

ii.  Yard Fire Hydrant shall be provided as per Chapter 9. 
iii. Fire extinguisher shall be provided as per Chapter 4. 

28. WASTE GAS 

BURNERS 

1.  RISK 
 
i.  Gas Piping and appurtenances. 
 
2.  VENTILATION 
 
i.  Not Applicable 
 
3.  FIRE DETECTION 
 
i.  Not Required. 
 
4.  FIRE PROTECTION 
 
i.  Not Required. 

29. UNDERGROUND 
TUNNELS WITH 
PIPING CON-
TAINING SLUDGE 
GAS AND       
NATURAL GAS 

1.  RISK 
 
i.  Ignition or natural gas or sludge gas. 
 
2.  VENTILATION 
 
i.  Not Required. 
 
3.  FIRE DETECTION 
 
i.  Combustible Gas Detection shall be provided and Fire Detection and Alarm 

System shall be provided for ancillary buildings, as per Chapter 8. 

 
4.  FIRE PROTECTION, IF ENCLOSED 
 
i.  Fire extinguisher shall be provided as per Chapter 4. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1081 of 1348 

 

Table 14.3.: Fire and Life Safety Requirements for Wastewater treatment facilities 

HAZARD/
LOCATION 

REQUIREMENTS 

30. SLUDGE DRYING,    1.  RISK 

 
i.  Dust explosion and dust ignition. 
 
2.  VENTILATION FOR PROCESS AREAS, IF ENCLOSED 
 
i.  Not Required. 
 
3.  FIRE DETECTION, IF ENCLOSED 
 
i.  Fire Detection and Alarm System shall be provided, as per Chapter 8. 
 
4.  FIRE PROTECTION, IF ENCLOSED 
 
i.  Automatic Water Sprinkler/Automatic Foam System/ Water Spray/Water 
Mist s, as applicable on fire risk assessment shall be provided as per            
Chapter 9. 

ii.  Yard Fire Hydrant shall be provided as per Chapter 9. 
iii. Fire extinguisher shall be provided as per Chapter 4. 
 
5.  DUST EXPLSOION 
 
i.  Explosion protection for the area and boilers shall be provided upon fire risk 

assessment, in accordance with NFPA 61, NFPA 69, NFPA 499 and NFPA  654. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1082 of 1348 

2.4.  District Cooling Plants and Cooling Towers– Fire and 

Life Safety 

 

 
2.4.1. General 

 

2.4.1.1.  The requirements of this chapter provide minimum fire and life safety guide-

lines for District Cooling facilities and cooling towers.  

 
2.4.1.2.  The Fire and Life Safety requirements for district cooling plants and cooling 

towers shall comply with Table 14.4. 

Table 14.4.: Fire and Life Safety Requirements for District Cooling facilities and Cooling Towers 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  CONSTRUCTION 
 
i.  Plant shall be compartmented into separate fire areas, such as pump rooms, 

control rooms, electrical equipment rooms, battery rooms etc. with 2 hour 
fire resistance rated walls Chapter 1. Construction. 

 
2.  LIFE SAFETY 
 
i.  Minimum of 2 exits shall be provided for the pump rooms, in compliance with 

Chapter 3. Means of Egress. 

ii.  Exit Signs shall be provided as per Chapter 5. Exit Signs. 
iii. Emergency Lighting shall be provided as per Chapter 6. Emergency Lighting 
 
3.  VENTILATION  
 
i.  Ventilation shall be provided in compliance with Chapter 10. Smoke Control 

Systems. 

 
4.  FIRE DETECTION 
 
i.  Heat Detection and Alarm System shall be provided, as per Chapter 8. Fire 

Detection and Alarm System. 

 
5.  FIRE PROTECTION 
 
i.  Automatic Water Sprinkler shall be provided as per Chapter 9. Fire Protection 

Systems. 

ii.  Wet Risers shall be provided throughout in accordance with Chapter 9. Fire 

Protection Systems. 

iii. Fire extinguisher shall be provided as per Chapter 4. 

i.  Fire and Life safety, Fire Detection and Fire Protection requirements for these 
hazards and locations, if any, shall be in accordance with Section 2.1. Substa-
tions, of this chapter. 

HAZARD/
LOCATION 

1.  PUMP ROOMS 

(CHILLED WATER 
PUMPS, MAKE UP 
WATER PUMPS)  

 
2.  R.O. PLANT 

(REVERSE         
OSMOSIS)  

 
3.  CHILLER ROOMS  

4.  TRANSFORMERS 
5.  CAPACITIR BANKS 
6. SWITCHGEAR 

ROOMS 

7. CABLE SPREADING 

ROOMS  

8.  CONTROL ROOMS 
9. BATTERY ROOMS 
10. BATTERY 

CHARGER ROOMS 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1083 of 1348 

 

Table 14.4.: Fire and Life Safety Requirements for District Cooling facilities and Cooling Towers 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  CONSTRUCTION 
 
i.  Water cooling towers with combustible exterior surfaces, including deck, distribu-
tion basins, louvers fills etc., shall be located at least 30 m from                 a. Struc-
tures or processes that emit sparks or flying brands under ordinary circumstances, 
such as chimneys, incinerators, flare stacks or cob burners.            b. Materials or 
processes of severe fire hazard, such as petroleum processing and storage tanks, 
explosives manufacturing or storage, and petroleum product pipelines and pump-
ing stations. 

ii.  Cooling towers with combustible exterior surfaces which hare protected for expo-
sure protection such as water spray system as per Chapter 9. Fire Protection Sys-
tem, the separation distance of 12 m from structures and processes as mentioned 
in Table 14.4.11.1.i., above shall be acceptable. 

iii. Cooling towers with “noncombustible” surfaces, distribution system, louvers, fill 

and drift eliminator shall be permitted to be located at 12 m or more from hazards 
listed in Table 14.4.11.1.i. 

iv. A fire resistant partition, tested in accordance with NFPA 251., shall be provided 
to underside of the fan deck (counterflow towers) or distribution basin (crossflow 
towers) and shall extend below the operating water level of cold-water basin. 

 
2.  LIFE SAFETY 
 
i.  Minimum of 2 enclosed exits shall be provided for the cooling tower location, in 

compliance with Chapter 3. Means of Egress. 

ii.  Exit Signs shall be provided as per Chapter 5. Exit Signs. 
iii. Emergency Lighting shall be provided as per Chapter 6. Emergency Lighting 
 
3.  FIRE DETECTION 
 
i.  Heat Detection and Alarm System shall be provided, as per Chapter 8. Fire Detec-

tion and Alarm System. 

ii.  Where cooling tower deluge water spray system is provided, Pilot Line Detectors, 

installed in accordance with NFPA 214, shall be permitted to actuate the deluge 
water spray system. 

 
4.  FIRE PROTECTION 
 
i.  Where cooling tower’s structure, fan, distribution system, louvers, fill and drift 

eliminator materials are all of noncombustible materials, fire protection system is 
not required.  

ii.  Where any of the material of cooling tower is combustible and not certified as 

“noncombustible”, cooling tower shall be provided with deluge water spray sys-
tem as per NFPA 214. and Chapter 9. Fire Protection Systems. 

iii. Where deluge water spray system is provided, minimum rate of application shall 
be                                                                                                                                              
a. Under the fan decks of counterflow towers, shall be 0.5 gpm/ft2, including fan 
opening.                                                                                                                                      
b. Under the fan decks of crossflow towers, shall be 0.33 gpm/ft2, including fan 
opening.                                                                                                                                       
c. Over the fill areas of crossflow towers, shall be 0.5 gpm/ft2 . 

iv.  Wet Risers shall be provided throughout in accordance with Chapter 9. Fire Pro-

tection Systems. 

v.  Fire extinguisher shall be provided as per Chapter 4. 

HAZARD/
LOCATION 

11.  COOLING 
TOWERS  

 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1084 of 1348 

2.5.  GSM Towers (Switching Stations)- Fire and Life Safety 

 

 
2.5.1. General 

 

2.5.1.1.  The requirements of this chapter provide minimum fire and life safety guide-

lines for GSM Towers or Switching Stations.  

 
2.5.1.2.  The Fire and Life Safety requirements for GSM Towers or Switching Stations 

shall comply with Table 14.5. 

Table 14.5.: Fire and Life Safety Requirements for GSM Towers 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  CONSTRUCTION 
 
i.  Cabins and Pole and decorative pole shall be constructed of 

“Noncombustible” material in accordance with Chapter 1. Construction.,  
Table 1.7.45. 

 
2.  LIFE SAFETY 
 
i.  Emergency Lighting shall be provided as per Chapter 6. Emergency Lighting 
 
3.  FIRE DETECTION 
 
i.  Smoke Detection and Alarm System shall be provided, as per Chapter 8. Fire 

Detection and Alarm System.  

ii.  Smoke Detection and Alarm System shall be annunciated at Telecom service 

provider main control room. 

 
4.  FIRE PROTECTION 
 
i.  Fire extinguisher shall be provided as per Chapter 4. 
ii.  Clean agent system, where provided, shall comply with Chapter 9. Fire Pro-

tection Systems. 

 
 

HAZARD/
LOCATION 

1.  EQUIPMENT  

CABIN  

 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1085 of 1348Chapter 15 
ACCESSIBILITY 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1086 of 1348In this Chapter: 

Î Definitions of Accessibility terminology 
Î Design guidelines of various accessibility requirements in a building for 

emergency egress 

Î Guideline on Emergency Evacuation Plan for physically challenged 

Intent of the Chapter 

• 
• 

To fulfill “ACCESS ABILITY” vision. 
To ensure UAE buildings are as accessible to differently abled people as they 
are for everyone so that they can maneuver as naturally as everyone during 
emergencies. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1087 of 1348 

In this Chapter : 

Intent of the Chapter 

  Definitions of Accessibility 

terminology 

  Design guidelines of various 

accessibility requirements in a 
building for emergency egress 

  To fulfill “ACCESS ABILITY” vision. 

  To ensure UAE buildings are as accessible to determined 

people  as they are for everyone so that they can 
maneuver as naturally as everyone during emergencies. 

  Guideline on Emergency 

 

Evacuation Plan for people with 
determination 

1. Definitions 

 
1.1.  General 
 

1.1.1.  Shall  

 It is a mandatory requirement by Civil Defence. 
 

1.1.2.  Should 

 It is a suggested requirement recommended by Civil Defence but not mandatory. 
 

1.1.3.  Listed 

Approved and registered by individual Emirates’ Civil Defence material depart-
ment. 

 

1.1.4.  Accessible 

A site, building, a facility or portion thereof, exterior or interior, public or private 
spaces having features in their design and constructions that enable people with de-
termination to maneuver easily. 

 
1.1.5.  Accessible Route 

A continuous , unobstructed path that provides “accessibility” as defined above. 

       
1.1.6.  Circulation Path 

An exterior or interior way of passage from one place to another for pedestrians. 
 

1.1.7.  Common Use 

Interior or exterior “circulation paths”, rooms, spaces or elements that are not for 
public use and are made available for the shared use of two or more people. 
 

1.1.8.  Detectable Warning 

A standardized surface feature built in or applied to walking surfaces or other ele-
ments to warn visually impaired persons of hazards on a circulation path. 
 

1.1.9.  Employee Work Area 

All or any portion of a space used only by employees and only for work. Corridors, 
toilet rooms, kitchenettes and break rooms are not employee work areas. 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1088 of 13481.1.10.  Public Entrance 

   An entrance that is not a service entrance or a restricted entrance. 
 

1.1.11.  Public-Use Areas 

   Interior or exterior rooms or spaces that are made available to the general public. 

 
1.1.12.  Public-Use Areas 

   Interior or exterior rooms or spaces that are made available to the general public. 
 

1.1.13.  Restricted Entrance 

   An entrance that is made available for common use on a controlled basis, but not 

public use, and that is not a service entrance. 

 

1.1.14.  Self Service Storage Facility 

   Real property designed and used for the purpose of renting or leasing individual 

storage spaces to customers for the purpose of storing and removing personal 
property on a self-service basis. 

 

1.1.15.  Service Entrance 

   An entrance intended primarily for loading, unloading of goods or services. 
 

1.1.16.  Type A Unit 

   A dwelling unit or sleeping unit designed and constructed for accessibility in ac-

cordance with this code and the provisions for Type A units in ICC A117.1. 

 

1.1.17.  Type B Unit 

   A dwelling unit or sleeping unit designed and constructed for accessibility in ac-

cordance with this code and the provisions for Type B units in ICC A117.1. 

 

1.1.18.  TTY 

   A TTY is a special device that lets people who are deaf, hard of hearing, or speech-
impaired use the telephone to communicate, by allowing them to type messages 
back and forth to one another instead of talking and listening. A TTY is required at 
both ends of the conversation in order to communicate. 

 
 
 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1089 of 1348 

2.  Accessibility 

 

2.1. Intention 

2.1.1. 
 
2.1.2. 

 
2.1.3. 

The Accessibility requirements of Civil Defence are to address the following. 

To provide “ACCESS ABILITY” to all UAE people who are physically challenged, inline 
with UAE leader’s vision of making UAE the most “Accessible” country in the world for 
“People with Determination”. 

To make Sites, Buildings, Structures, Facilities, Elements and Spaces, both exterior or 
interior, both public and personal, accessible to people with determination so that they 
can maneuver, evacuate and find refuge as naturally as everyone. 

 

2.2. Scope 

2.2.1.  Only accessible routes, doors, elevators, Stairs, 
refuge areas and parking are addressed in this 
chapter as ‘Accessible Means of Egress’. Other 
accessible requirements for Utilities, recrea-
tional facilities, Furnishing and Equipment etc., 
where required by designers to comply with 
‘Accessible compliant buildings’ shall be as per 
NFPA 5000 and ICC ANSI A117.1. 

2.3.  Accessibility Concept 

 

2.3.1. 

Physical disability, or severe mobility impair-
ment, is the “the ability to move to stairs but 
without the ability to use the stairs.” as per 
ADA (Americans with Disability Act) 

 
2.3.2.  ANSI A117.1 defines the technical criteria as to 

“make sites, facilities, buildings and elements 
accessible to and usable by people with such 
physical disabilities as the inability to walk, 
difficulty walking, reliance on walking aids, 
blindness and visual impairment, deafness and 
hearing impairment, incoordination, reaching 
and manipulation disabilities, lack of stamina, 
difficulty interpreting and reacting to sensory 
information, and extremes of physical size.” 

Did You Know? 

UAE is already a friendly na-
tion on many fronts for peo-
ple with determination . 
 
Municipalities have building 
codes in place which ensure 
entrances,  elevators,  rest 
rooms, libraries, parks,    
traffic signal junctions etc. 
are addressed 
 
RTA has designed metro 
station ticket counters, 
bathrooms, audio-visual no-
tices, tactile floor paths for 
visually impaired, buses 
with lower entry access, 
foot bridge having elevators 
with people with determina-
tion in mind. 
 
Dubai Taxi has 7 special  
taxis to meet special needs 
of people with determina-
tion, available 24x7 

 
2.3.3. 

 
2.3.4. 

 

The Accessibility scope is broadly inclusive of all aspects of construction that affect the 
ability of people with determination to approach, enter, utilize a facility and evacuate 
the facility. The term “facility” includes not only the building and structures, but also the 
site on which they are located. Features of a site, such as parking areas and paths of 
travel from a public way to a structure, affect accessibility and are, therefore, within the 
scope. 

The Accessibility requirements required by this code of practice are minimum guide-
lines. It is the architect and consultants responsibility to design and implement these 
requirements along with Municipality, NFPA 5000 and ICC/ANSI A117.1. requirements. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1090 of 1348 

3. Details of Accessibility Features 
 

3.1.  Accessible Route 
 

3.1.1. 

 The requirements of Accessible Route shall be as per Table 15.1. 

 
 

Table 15.1.: Accessible Routes Requirement 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. WALKING             

SURFACE 

i.  Walking surface shall not have slope steeper than 1:20. 
ii.  Floor surfaces shall be stable, firm, and slip resistant. 
iii.  Exposed edges of carpet shall be fastened to the floor and shall have trim 

along the entire length of the exposed edge. 

iv.  Changes in level greater than 6.4 mm in height and not more than13 mm max-
imum in height shall be beveled with a slope not steeper than 1 :2. Changes in 
turning space shall not be permitted. 

v.  Changes in level greater than 13 mm in height shall be ramped, as per           

Table 15.1.7. Ramp.  

i.  The turning space shall be allowed to be a circular space with a 60-inch (1525 

mm) minimum diameter. 

ii.  The turning space shall be allowed to be a T-shaped space within a 1525 mm 

minimum square, with arms and base 915 mm minimum in width. Each arm of 
the T shall be clear of obstructions 305 mm minimum in each direction, and 
the base shall be clear of obstructions 610 mm minimum. 

iii.  The clear floor space shall be1220 mm minimum in length and 760 mm mini-

mum in width. 

i.  Objects with leading edges more than 685 mm and not more than 2030 mm 
above the floor shall protrude100 mm maximum horizontally into the circula-
tion path. (Handrails shall be permitted to protrude 115 mm maximum.) 

ii.  Vertical clearance shall be 2030 mm minimum. Rails or other barriers shall be 
provided where the vertical clearance is less than 2030 mm. The leading edge 
of such rails or barrier shall be located 685 mm maximum above the floor. 

iii.  Where a forward reach is unobstructed, the high forward reach shall be1220 

mm maximum and the low forward reach shall be 380 mm minimum above 
the floor. 

iv.  Where a high forward reach is over an obstruction, the clear floor space shall 

extend beneath the element for a distance not less than the required reach 
depth over the obstruction. The high forward reach shall be1220 mm maxi-
mum above the floor where the reach depth is 510mm maximum. Where the 
reach depth exceeds 510 mm, the high forward reach shall be 1120 mm maxi-
mum above the floor, and the reach depth shall be 635 mm maximum. 

v.  Where a clear floor space complying with Section 305 allows a parallel ap-

proach to an element and the edge of the clear floor space is 255 mm maxi-
mum from the element, the high side reach shall be1220 mm maximum and 
the low side reach shall be 380 mm minimum above the floor. 

vi.  Where a clear floor space allows a parallel approach to an element and the 
high side reach is over an obstruction, the height of the obstruction shall be 
865 mm maximum above the floor and the depth of the obstruction shall be 
610 mm maximum. The high side reach shall be1220 mm maximum above the 
floor for a reach depth of 255 mm maximum. Where the reach depth exceeds 
255 mm, the high side reach shall be1170 mm maximum above the floor for a 
reach depth of 610 mm maximum. 

2. TURNING SPACE 

3. PROTRUDING     

OBJECTS 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1091 of 1348 

 

 

Figure 15.1.: High Reach, Forward Reach, Side Reach Dimensions in mm 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1092 of 1348 

 

Table 15.1.: Accessible Routes Requirement 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

4. CLEAR 
WIDTH 

i.  Clear width of an accessible route shall be 915 mm. 
ii.  Where an accessible route makes a 180 degree turn around an object that is less 

than 48 inches (1220 mm) in width, clear widths shall be1065 mm minimum ap-
proaching the turn, 1220 mm  minimum during the turn, and 1065 mm minimum 
leaving the turn. 

iii.  An accessible route with a clear width less than1525 mm shall provide passing spac-

es at intervals of 61 m maximum. Passing spaces shall be either a1525 mm mini-
mum by 1525 mm minimum space, or an intersection of two walking surfaces that 
provide a T-shaped turning space, provided the base and arms of the T-shaped 
space extend 1220 mm minimum beyond the intersection. 

5. DOORS 

i.  Minimum clear width of the doorway or at least one of the active leafs of doorways 

with two leaves shall be 915 mm as per Chapter 3. Means of Egress. 

ii.  Door closers and door stops shall be permitted to be1980 mm minimum above the 

floor. 

iii.  Minimum maneuvering clearances at manual swinging doors shall comply with   

Table 15.1.a. and shall include the full clear opening width of the doorway. 

iv.  Minimum maneuvering clearances at sliding and folding doors shall comply with 

Table 15.1.b.  

Table 15.1.a.: Maneuvering clearance distances at Manual Doors 

APPROACH DIRECTION  DOOR SIDE  PERPENDICULAR TO 

DOORWAY 

PARELLEL TO      
DOORWAY 

1. FROM FRONT 

2. FROM FRONT 

Pull Side  

1525 mm 

Push Side  

1220 mm 

3. FROM HINGE SIDE 

Pull Side  

1525 mm 

4. FROM HINGE SIDE 

Pull Side  

1370 mm 

5. FROM HINGE SIDE 

Push Side  

1065 mm 

6. FROM LATCH SIDE 

Pull Side  

1220 mm 

7. FROM LATCH SIDE 

Push Side  

1065 mm 

455 mm 

0 mm 

915 mm 

1065 mm 

560 mm 

610 mm 

610 mm 

Table 15.1.b.: Maneuvering clearance distances at Sliding and Folding Doors 

APPROACH DIRECTION  PERPENDICULAR TO DOORWAY  PARELLEL TO DOORWAY 

1. FROM FRONT 

1220 mm 

2. FROM NON LATCH SIDE 

1065 mm 

3. FROM LATCH SIDE 

1065 mm 

 

 

0 mm 

560 mm 

610 mm 

Did You Know? 

UAE customs exempts goods 

and materials used by people 

with disabilities from custom 

duties. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1093 of 1348 

 

Figure 15.2.: Maneuvering Clearance Distances at Manual Swinging Doors in mm 

Figure 15.3.: Maneuvering Clearance Distances at Sliding and Folding Doors in mm 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1094 of 1348 

 

Table 15.1.: Accessible Routes Requirement 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

6. DOOR            
HARDWARE 

7. RAMPS 

i.  Handles, pulls, latches, locks, and other operable parts on accessible doors shall 

have a shape that is easy to grasp with one hand and does not require tight 
grasping, pinching, or twisting of the wrist to operate. Operable parts of such 
hardware shall be 34 inches (865 mm) minimum and 48 inches (1220 mm) maxi-
mum above the floor. Where sliding doors are in the fully open position, oper-
ating hardware shall be exposed and usable from both sides. 

i.  Ramps shall have running slope greater than 1:20 and shall not be steeper than 

1:12. 

ii.  The clear width of a ramp run shall be 915 mm minimum. Handrails and hand 

rail supports that are provided on the ramp run shall not project into the re-
quired clear width of the ramp run. 

iii.  The rise for any ramp run shall be 760 mm maximum. 
iv.  Ramps shall have landings at the bottom and top of each ramp run. 
v.  Clear width of landings shall be at least as wide as the widest ramp run leading 

to the landing. 

vi.  Landings shall have a clear length of 1525 mm minimum. 
vii.  Ramps that change direction at ramp landings shall be sized to provide a turning 

space complying with Table 15.1.2. 

viii. Ramp runs with a rise greater than 150 mm shall have handrails. 
ix. 

 

8. ELEVATORS 

i.  Elevators shall be passenger elevators. 
ii.  Elevator call buttons and keypads shall be minimum 19 mm in the smallest di-

mension located within reach range as per Table 15.1.3. 

iii.  Call buttons shall have visible signals to indicate when each call is registered and 

when each call is answered. Call buttons shall provide an audible signal or me-
chanical motion of the button to indicate when each call is registered. 

iv.  Emergency controls, including the emergency alarm, shall be grouped at the 

bottom of the panel. 

v.  Elevator doors shall be horizontal sliding type. Car gates shall be prohibited. 
vi.  Elevator hoistway and car doors shall open and close automatically. 
vii.  Elevator car door and hoistway door shall automatically reopen if the door be-

comes obstructed by an object or person. 

viii. Elevator doors shall remain fully open in response to a car call for 3 seconds 

minimum. 

ix.  Elevator car minimum clear inside dimensions shall be as per Figure 15.4. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1095 of 1348 

 

Figure 15.4.: Inside Dimensions of Elevator Car, in mm 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1096 of 1348 

3.2.  Accessible Parking 
 

3.2.1. 

 The requirements for accessible Parking shall be as per Table 15.2. 

Table 15.2.: Accessible Parking Requirement 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. PARKING 

SPACE 
WIDTH 

2. ACCESS 

AISLE 

i.  Parking reserved for people with determination shall be closest to the destination. 
ii.  Car parking spaces shall be 2440 mm minimum in width. Van parking spaces shall be 

3350 mm minimum in width. 

iii.  Van parking spaces shall be permitted to be 2440 mm minimum in width where the 

adjacent access aisle is 2440 mm minimum in width. 

iv.  Car and van parking spaces shall be marked to define the width. Where parking 

spaces are marked with lines, the width measurements of parking spaces and adja-
cent access aisles shall be made from the centerline of the markings. 

v.  Where parking spaces or access aisles are not adjacent to another parking space or 

access aisle, measurements shall be permitted to include the full width of the line 
defining the parking space or access aisle. 

i.  Access aisles serving car and van parking spaces shall be 1525 mm minimum in 

width. 

ii.  A vertical clearance of 2490 mm minimum shall be provided for the parking spaces 
for vans, access aisles serving such parking spaces and vehicular routes serving park-
ing spaces for vans. 

iii.  Access aisles shall adjoin an accessible route. Two parking spaces shall be permitted 

to share a common access aisle. Access aisles shall not overlap with the vehicular 
way. Parking spaces shall be permitted to have access aisles placed on either side of 
the car or van parking space. Van parking spaces that are angled shall have access 
aisles located on the passenger side of the parking space. 

iv.  Access aisles shall extend the full length of the parking spaces they serve. 
v.  Access aisles shall be marked so as to discourage parking in them. Where access 

aisles are marked with lines, the width measurements of access aisles and adjacent 
parking spaces shall be made from the centerline of the markings. 

vi.  Where access aisles or parking spaces are not adjacent to another access aisle or 

parking space, measurements shall be permitted to include the full width of the line 
defining the access aisle or parking space. 

vii.  Accessible parking shall have signs, both in Arabic and English,1525 mm minimum 

above the floor of the parking space, measured to the bottom of the sign. 

viii.  Parking spaces and access aisles shall be designed so that cars and vans, when 
parked, cannot obstruct the required clear width of adjacent accessible routes. 

 
 

 

Figure 15.5.: Parking Space and Aisle 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1097 of 1348 

3.3.  Accessible Stair 
 

3.3.1. 

 The requirements for accessible stair shall be as per Table 15.3. 

Table 15.3.: Accessible Stair Requirement 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. STAIR 

i.  All steps on a flight of stairs shall have uniform riser height and uniform tread 

depth.  

ii.  Risers shall be100 mm minimum and 180 mm maximum in height.  
iii.  Treads shall be 280 mm minimum in depth. 
iv.  Open risers shall not be permitted. 
v.  Tread Surface shall be as per Table 15.1.1. 
vi.  Stairs shall have handrails as per Table 15.3.2. 
vii.  The radius of curvature at the leading edge of the tread shall be 13 mm maximum. 
viii. The leading 51 mm of the tread shall have visual contrast of dark-on-light or light-on

-dark from the remainder of the tread. 

ix.  Lighting facilities shall be capable of providing 10 foot-candles (108 lux) of illumi-

nance measured at the center of tread surfaces and on landing surfaces within 610 
mm of step nosing. 

x.  Stair level identification signs in raised characters and braille shall be located at 

each floor level landing in all enclosed stairways adjacent to the door leading from 
the stairwell into the corridor to identify the floor level. The exit door discharging to 
the outside or to the level of exit discharge shall have a sign with raised characters 
and braille stating "EXIT." See Chapter 3.,  Table 3.4.12. and Table 3.12.8. 

2. HANDRAIL 

i.  Handrails shall be provided on both sides of stairs and ramps. 
ii. 

In assembly seating areas, handrails shall not be required on both sides along aisle 
stairs, provided with a handrail either at the side or within the aisle. 

iii.  In assembly seating areas, handrails shall not be required on the sides of ramped 

aisles serving seats. 

iv.  Handrails shall be continuous within the full length of each stair flight or ramp run. 
v.  Handrails shall not be required to be continuous in aisles serving seating where 

handrails are discontinuous to provide access to seating and to permit crossovers 
within the aisles. 

vi.  Top of gripping surfaces of handrails shall be 865 mm minimum and 965 mm maxi-

mum vertically above stair nosing, ramp surfaces and walking surfaces.  

vii.  Handrails shall be at a consistent height above stair nosing, ramp surfaces and walk-

ing surfaces. 

viii. Clearance between handrail gripping surface and adjacent surfaces shall be 38 mm 

minimum. 

ix.  Ramp handrails shall extend horizontally above the landing 305 mm minimum be-
yond the top and bottom of ramp runs. Extensions shall return to a wall, guard, or 
floor, or shall be continuous to the handrail of an adjacent ramp run. 

x.  See Chapter 3., Table 3.4.10. for Details and Figures. 

 
 

 

Figure 15.6.: Extension of Handrail 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1098 of 1348 

3.4.  Accessible Audio Visual Alarms and Signs 
 

3.4.1. 

 The requirements for accessible Audio Visual Alarms shall be as per Table 15.4. 

 
 

Table 15.4.: Requirements for Accessible Audio Visual Alarms and Signs 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. ALARMS 

2. SIGNS 

i.  Accessible audible and visible alarms and notifications devices shall be installed as 

per Chapter 8. Fire Detection and Alarm Systems. 

ii.  All visible notification appliances provided within the unit for smoke detection noti-

fication shall be activated upon smoke detection.  

iii.  All visible notification appliances provided within the unit for building fire alarm 

notification shall be activated upon activation of the building fire alarm in the por-
tion of the building containing the unit. 

i.  Tactile signs shall contain both raised characters and braille. Where signs with both 

visual and raised characters are required, either one sign with both visual and 
raised characters, or two separate signs, one with visual, and one with raised char-
acters, shall be provided. 

ii.  Directional signs, egress signs, room identification signs and floor identification 

signs, both in Arabic and English shall have characters in conventional form. Char-
acters shall not be in Italic, oblique, script, decorative or other unusual forms. 

iii.  The uppercase letter "I" shall be used to determine the allowable height of all char-

acters of a font. The uppercase letter "I" of the font shall have a minimum height 
complying with Table 15.4.a. 

iv.  The uppercase letter "0" shall be used to determine the allowable width of all char-

acters of a font. The width of the uppercase letter "0" of the font shall be 55 per-
cent minimum and 110 percent maximum of the height of the uppercase "I" of the 
font. 

v.  Spacing between the baselines of separate lines of characters within a message 

shall be 135 percent minimum and 170 percent maximum of the character height. 
vi.  Characters and their background shall have a non-glare finish. Characters shall con-

trast with their background, with either light characters on a dark background, or 
dark characters on a light background. 

vii.  Braille Signage shall comply with ANSI 117.1. 
viii.  Pictograms shall have a field 150 mm minimum in height. Characters or braille shall 

not be located in the pictogram field. 

Table 15.4.a.: Visual Character and Letters Specifications 

HEIGHT ABOVE FLOOR TO   
BASELINE OF CHARACTER 

HORIZONTAL   
VIEWING  DISTANCE 

MINIMUM CHARACTER HEIGHT 

1. 1015 MM TO LESS THAN OR 

Less than 1830 mm 

16 mm 

EQUAL TO1780 MM. 

2. 1015 MM TO LESS THAN OR 

1830 mm and greater 

EQUAL TO1780 MM. 

16 mm plus 3.2 mm per 305 mm of 
viewing distance above 1830 mm 

3. GREATER THAN 1780 MM TO LESS 

Less than 4570 mm 

51 mm 

THAN OR EQUAL TO 3050 MM 

4. GREATER THAN 1780 MM TO LESS 

4570 mm and greater 

THAN OR EQUAL TO 3050 MM 

51 mm, plus 3.2 mm per 305 mm of 
viewing distance above 4570 mm 

5. GREATER THAN 3050 MM 

Less than 6400 mm 

75 mm 

6. GREATER THAN 3050 MM 

6400 mm and greater 

75 mm, plus 3.2 mm per 305 mm of 
viewing distance above 6400 mm 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1099 of 1348 

 

Figure 15.7.: Examples of International Accessible Symbols 

Table 15.4.: Requirements for Accessible Audio Visual Alarms and Signs 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

3. INACCESSIBLE 

LOCATION 
SIGNS 

4. TELEPHONES 

5. TWO-WAY 

COMMUNICA-
TION    SYSTEMS 

 

i.  Directional signage indicating the route to nearest accessible element shall be 
provided at INACCESSIBLE BUILDING ENTRANCE, INACCESSIBLE PUBLIC TOILET 
AND BATHING FACILITIES, ELEVATORS NOT SERVING ACCESSIBLE ROUTE, 
BATHING ROOM INDICATING NEAREST FAMILY/ASSITED USE REST ROOMS, 
EXITS AND STAIRS NOT SERVING AS MEANS OF EMERGENCY EGRESS. 

i.  For wheelchair accessible telephones, clear floor space shall be as per          

Table 15.1. 

ii.  Where a parallel approach is provided, the distance from the edge of the tele-

phone enclosure to the face of the telephone shall be 255 mm maximum. 

iii.  Where a forward approach is provided, the distance from the front edge of a 

counter within the enclosure to the face of the telephone shall be 510 mm 
maximum. 

iv.  The telephone handset cord shall be 735 mm minimum in length. 
v.  Telephones shall be hearing aid compatible. 
vi.  Public telephones required to have volume controls shall be equipped with a 

receiver volume control that provides a gain adjustable up to 20 dB minimum. 
Incremental volume controls shall provide at least one intermediate step of 
gain of 12 dB minimum. An automatic reset shall be provided. 

vii.  TIYs required at a public pay telephone shall be permanently affixed within, or 

adjacent to, the telephone enclosure. Where an acoustic coupler is used, the 
telephone cord shall be of sufficient length to allow connection of the TIY and 
the telephone receiver. 

viii. When in use, the touch surface of TTY keypads shall be 865 mm minimum 

above the floor. 

i.  The system shall provide both visual and audible signals. 
ii.  Handset cords, if provided, shall be 735 mm minimum in length. 
iii.  Telephone entry systems shall comply with ANSI/DASMA 303. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1100 of 1348 

3.5.  Accessible Special Rooms and Spaces 
 

3.5.1. 

 The requirements for accessible Audio Visual Alarms shall be as per Table 15.5. 

Table 15.5.: Requirements for Accessible Special Rooms and Spaces 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. ASSEMBLY 

AREAS 

i.  A single wheelchair space shall be 915 mm minimum in width. Where two adjacent 
wheelchair spaces are provided, each wheelchair space shall be 840 mm) minimum 
in width. 

ii.  Where a wheelchair space can be entered from the front or rear, the wheelchair 

space shall be 1220 mm minimum in depth. Where a wheelchair space can only be 
entered from the side, the wheelchair space shall be 1525 mm minimum in depth. 

iii.  The wheelchair space shall adjoin an accessible route. The accessible route shall not 

overlap the wheelchair space. 

iv.  A wheelchair space shall not overlap the required width of an aisle. 
v.  The companion seat shall be provided beside each wheelchair space and it shall be 

equivalent in size, quality, comfort and amenities to the seats in the immediate area 
to the wheelchair space location. Companion seats shall be permitted to be movea-
ble. 

vi.  In row seating, the companion seat shall be located to provide shoulder alignment 

with the wheelchair space occupant. The shoulder of the wheelchair space occupant 
shall be measured either 915 mm from the front or 305 mm from the rear of the 
wheelchair space. The floor surface for the companion seat shall be at the same ele-
vation as the wheelchair space floor surface. 

vii.  Dispersion of seats, line of sight for wheel chair spaces etc. shall be as per ANSI 

117.1. 

viii. Minimum required number of wheelchair spaces shall be as per Table 15.5.a. 

Table 15.5.a.: Number of Wheelchair spaces required 

TOTAL SEATING IN ASSEMBLY AREA  MINIMUM REQUIRED NUMBER OF WHEEL-

CHAIR SPACE 

1. 4 TO 25 

2. 26 TO 50 

3. 51 TO 100 

4. 101 TO 300 

5. 301 TO 500 

7. 501 TO 5000 

5. 5001 AND ABOVE 

 
 

1 

2 

4 

5 

6 

6, plus 1 additional space for each 150 seats or fraction    
thereof between 501 through 5000 

36, plus 1 additional space for each 200 seats or fraction 
thereof over 5000 

Figure 15.8.: Width and Depth of Accessible Wheelchair Spaces in Assembly 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1101 of 1348 

 

Table 15.5.: Requirements for Accessible Special Rooms and Spaces 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

2. KITCHEN 

AREAS 

i.  Pass through Kitchen area accessibility shall be as per Figure 15.10., a and b. 
ii.  U shaped Kitchen area accessibility shall be as per Figure 15.10., c and d. 

 

Figure 15.9.: Accessible Kitchen Area Clearances in mm 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1102 of 1348 

Table 15.5.: Requirements for Accessible Special Rooms and Spaces 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

3. BUS STOPS 

4. RAIL AND 

TRAM               
PLATFORMS 

i.  Bus stop boarding and alighting areas shall have a 2440 mm minimum clear 

length, measured perpendicular to the curb or vehicle roadway edge, and a 1525 
mm minimum clear width, measured parallel to the vehicle roadway. 

ii.  The slope of the bus stop boarding and alighting area parallel to the vehicle road-

way shall be the same as the roadway, to the maximum extent practicable. The 
slope of the bus stop boarding and alighting area perpendicular to the vehicle 
roadway shall be 1 :48 maximum. 

iii.  Bus shelters, bus stop boarding and alighting areas shall be connected to streets, 
sidewalks, or pedestrian paths by an accessible route complying with Table 15.1. 

iv.  Bus shelters shall provide a minimum clear floor space as per Table 15.1. 
v.  Bus route identification signs shall comply with Table 15.4. 

i.  Rail and Tram platforms shall not exceed a slope of 1 :48 in all directions. 
ii.  Platform boarding edges not protected by platform screens or guards shall have a 

detectable warning. 

iii.  Rail station signs shall comply with Table 15.4. 
iv.  Where signs identify a station or a station entrance, at least one sign with raised 

characters and braille complying with Table 15.4. shall be provided at each en-
trance. 

v.  Station names, Lists of stations, routes and destinations served by the station 
that are located on boarding areas, platforms, or mezzanines shall have visual 
characters complying with Table 15.4. 

vi.  At least one sign with raised characters and braille complying with Table 15.4. 
shall be provided on each platform or boarding area to identify specific station. 

vii.  Where public address systems convey audible information to the public, the 

same or equivalent information shall be provided in a visual format. 

viii. Escalators where provided, shall have a 815 mm minimum clear width, and shall 
comply with Requirements 6.1.3.S.6-Step Demarcations, and 6.1.3.6.S-Flat Steps 
of ASME A 17.1 /CSA B44. 

ix.  Where a circulation path crosses tracks, it shall comply with Table 15.1. and shall 
have a detectable warning 610 mm in depth complying with Table 15.4., extend-
ing the full width of the circulation path. 

 
 

Figure 15.10.: Accessible Bus Shelter clearances in mm 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1103 of 1348 

3.6.  Accessible Dwelling and Sleeping Units 
 

3.6.1. 

 The requirements for accessible dwelling and sleeping units shall be as per                    
Table 15.6. 

 
 

Table 15.6.: Requirements for Accessible Dwelling and Sleeping Units 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. ACCESSIBLE 

UNITS 

2. ACCESSIBLE   
TOILET AND 
BATHING 
ROOMS 

3. TYPE A             

DWELLING UNIT 

i.  The accessible primary entrance shall be on an accessible route from public 

and common areas. The primary entrance shall not be to a bedroom unless it 
is the only entrance. 

ii.  At least one accessible route shall connect all spaces and elements that are a 

part of the unit. Accessible routes shall coincide with or be located in the same 
area as a general circulation path. 

iii.  All rooms served by an accessible route shall provide a turning space, walking 

surface, doors and doorways, elevators, ramps as per Table 15.1.  

iv.  Lighting controls, electrical panel boards, electrical switches and receptacle 
outlets, environmental controls, appliance controls, operating hardware for 
operable windows, plumbing fixture controls, and user controls for security or 
intercom systems shall comply with ANSI 117.1. 

v.  Kitchens shall comply with Table 15.5.2. 
vi.  At least one bed shall be provided with clear floor space, positioned for paral-

lel approach to the side of the bed and an open bed frame. 

i.  A turning space complying with Table 15.1. shall be provided within the room . 
The required turning space shall not be provided within a toilet compartment. 

ii.  Doors shall not swing into the clear floor space or clearance for any fixture. 
iii.  Where mirrors are located above lavatories, a mirror shall be located over the 

accessible lavatory and shall be mounted with the bottom edge of the re-
flecting surface 1015 mm maximum above the floor. Where mirrors are locat-
ed above counters that do not contain lavatories, the mirror shall be mounted 
with the bottom edge of the reflecting surface 1015 mm maximum above the 
floor. 

iv.  Coat hooks shall be located within one of the reach ranges specified in           

Table 15.1. Shelves shall be 1015 mm minimum and 1220 mm maximum 
above the floor. 

v.  The accessible toilet and bathing fixtures shall be in a single toilet/bathing ar-

ea, such that travel between fixtures does not require travel through other 
parts of the unit. 

i.  Type A Dwelling unit shall be an accessible unit as per Table 15.6.1. 
ii.  At least one toilet and bathroom shall comply with accessible toilet and bath-

room as per Table 15.6.2. 

iii.  Reinforcement shall be provided for the future installation of grab bars at wa-

ter closets, bath tubs and for shower seats. 

iv.  The water closet shall be positioned with a wall to the rear and to one side. 
The centerline of the water closet shall be 405 mm minimum and 455 mm 
maximum from the sidewall. 

v.  Clear floor space as per Table 15.1. shall be provided for dishwasher, cooktop, 

oven and refrigerators. 

vi.  Water closet location, clearances and height shall comply with Figure 15.11. 
vii.  Bath tub location and clearances shall comply with Figure 15.12. 
viii. Type A dwelling unit Kitchen clearances and sink shall comply with                         

Figure 15.13. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1104 of 1348 

 

 
 

Figure 15.11.: Unit A Water Closet Clearances in mm 

Figure 15.12.: Unit A Bathtub Clearances in mm 

Figure 15.13.: Unit A Kitchen Clearances in mm 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1105 of 1348 

Table 15.6.: Requirements for Accessible Dwelling and Sleeping Units 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

4.  TYPE B 

DWELLING 
UNIT 

i.  Type B Dwelling unit shall be an accessible unit as per Table 15.6.1. 
ii.  At least one toilet and bathroom shall comply with accessible toilet and bathroom 

as per Table 15.6.2. 

iii.  Reinforcement shall be provided for the future installation of grab bars at water 

closets, bath tubs and for shower seats. 

iv.  Clear floor space as per Table 15.1. shall be provided for dishwasher, cooktop, oven 

and refrigerators. 

v.  Water closet location, clearances and height shall comply with Figure 15.14. 
vi.  Bath tub location and clearances shall comply with Figure 15.15.a., 15.15.b. and 

15.15.c. 

vii.  Type B dwelling unit Kitchen clearances and sink shall comply with Figure 15.16. 

Figure 15.14.: Unit B Water Closet Clearances in mm 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1106 of 1348 

 

 

Figure 15.15.a.: Unit B Parallel approach Bathtub Clearances in mm 

Figure 15.15.b.: Unit B Forward approach Bathtub Clearances in mm 

 

Figure 15.15.c.: Unit B Bathroom Clearances in mm 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1107 of 1348 
 

 

 

Figure 15.16.: Unit B Kitchen Clearances in mm 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1108 of 1348 

ITEMS 

5. TYPE C 

(VISITABLE) 
DWELLING 
UNIT 

Table 15.6.: Requirements for Accessible Dwelling and Sleeping Units 

REQUIREMENTS 

i.  Circulation path shall consist of  walking surface with slope not steeper than 

1:20 with doors, doorways, ramps, elevators etc. as per Table 15.1. 

ii.  Doorways shall have a clear opening of 815 mm minimum. Clear opening of 

swinging doors shall be measured between the face of the door and stop, with 
the door open 90 degrees. 

iii.  At least one unit entrance shall be on a circulation path from a public street or 

sidewalk, a dwelling unit driveway, or a garage. 

iv.  The entrance level shall include a toilet room or bathroom and one habitable 

space with an area 6.5 m2 minimum.  

v.  A toilet room or bathroom shall not be required on an entrance level with less 

than 11.1 m2 of habitable space. 

vi.  At a minimum, the toilet room or bathroom shall include a lavatory and a water 
closet. Reinforcement shall be provided for the future installation of grab bars at 
water closets. Clearances at the water closet shall comply with Figure 15.12. 
vii.  At a minimum, the food preparation area shall include a sink, a cooking appli-

ance, and a refrigerator. Clearances between all opposing base cabinets, counter 
tops, appliances or walls within the food preparation area shall be 1015 mm 
minimum in width. 

viii.  Receptacle outlets and operable parts of lighting controls shall be located 380 

mm minimum and 1220 mm maximum above the floor. 

ix.  A means for visually identifying a visitor without opening the unit entry door 

shall be provided. Peepholes, where used, shall provide a minimum 180-degree 
range of view. 

Points to Ponder 

The first ever World Report on disability, produced jointly by WHO and the World 
Bank, suggests that more than a billion people in the world today experience disa-
bility. 

That is more than one sixth of world population. 

Many countries have rapidly growing number of aged people. With advanced med-
ical science this aged group will survive longer with some kind of disability. 

In addition, newly undergone surgery and treatment, survive grave injuries and 
return with some kind of disability to inaccessible dwelling and work places. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1109 of 1348 

4. Application of Accessibility Features 
 

4.1. 

Application of accessible features in a building , site or structure shall be as per 
Table 15.7. 

 

Table 15.7.: Application of Accessible Features in a Building 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

EXCEPTIONS 

1. ACCESSIBLE 

ROUTE  

 
AS PER  
TABLE 15.1. 
AND 
ICC ANSI 117.1 

1. SITE AND SITE ARRIAVAL POINTS 
 
i.  Accessible Routes shall be provid-

ed within a site, from public 
transportation stops, accessible 
parking, accessible passenger 
loading zones, public streets and 
sidewalks to accessible building 
entrance. 

ii.  At least one accessible route shall 

connect accessible buildings, ac-
cessible facilities, accessible ele-
ments and accessible spaces that 
are on the same site. 

 
2. CONNECTED SPACES 
 
i.  When a building or portion of a 

building is required to be accessi-
ble, an accessible route shall be 
provided to each portion of the 
building, to accessible building 
entrances connecting accessible 
pedestrian walkways and the 
public way. 

 
 
3. EMPLOYEE WORK AREA 
 
i.  Common circulation areas in em-
ployee work space shall have ac-
cessible routes. 

 
 
 
 
4. PRESS BOXES 
 
i.  Press boxes in assembly areas 

shall have accessible routes. 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 
 
i.  Other than in buildings or facilities contain-

ing or serving Type B units, an accessible 
route shall not be required between site 
arrival points and the building or facility 
entrance if the only means of access be-
tween them is a vehicular way not provid-
ing for pedestrian access. 

ii.  An accessible route is not required be-

tween accessible buildings, accessible facil-
ities, accessible elements and accessible 
spaces that have, as the only means of ac-
cess between them, a vehicular way not 
providing for pedestrian access. 

 
 
i. 

ii. 

In ASSEMBLY areas with fixed seating, an 
accessible route shall not be required to 
serve levels where wheelchair spaces are 
not provided. 
In HEALTHCARE facilities, doors to sleeping 
units shall be exempted from the require-
ments for maneuvering clearance at the 
room side provided the door is a minimum 
of 1118 mm in width. 

 
 
 
i.  Accessible routes shall not be required in 

employee work spaces which are less than 
27.9 m2 in area. 

ii.  Accessible routes shall not be required in 

exterior, open to sky workplaces and at 
common circulation paths that are integral 
component of equipment. 

 
 
i.  An accessible route shall not be required 

to press boxes in bleachers that have 
points of entry at only 

ii.  one level, provided that the aggregate area 

of all press boxes is 46 m2 maximum. 

iii.  An accessible route shall not be required 
to free-standing press boxes that are ele-
vated above grade 3660 mm minimum 
provided that the aggregate area of all 
press boxes is 46 m2 maximum. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1110 of 1348 

 

Table 15.7.: Application of Accessible Features in a Building 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

EXCEPTIONS 

1. ACCESSIBLE 

ROUTE  

 
AS PER  
TABLE 15.1. 
AND 
ICC ANSI 117.1 

5. MULTI-STORY BUILDINGS 
 
i.  At least one accessible route shall 

connect each story and mezza-
nine in multi-story building. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6. LOCATION OF ACCESSIBLE ROUTE 
 
i.  Accessible routes shall coincide 
with or be located in the same 
area as a general circulation path. 
Where the circulation path is in-
terior, the accessible route shall 
also be interior. Where only one 
accessible route is provided, the 
accessible route shall not pass 
through kitchens, storage rooms, 
restrooms, closets or similar spac-
es. 

 
7. SECURITY BARRIERS 
 
i.  Accessible routes from parking 

garages contained within and 
serving Type B units are not re-
quired to be interior. 

ii.  A single accessible route is per-

mitted to pass through a kitchen 
or storage room in an Accessible 
unit, Type A unit or Type B unit. 

 

 
 
i.  Buildings that are less than 3 stories and  
279 m2 in area per story and are not MER-
CANTILE, MALL, HEALTHCARE OR TRANS-
PORTATION FACILITIES, accessible route is 
not required. 

ii.  Public building with 2 stories having 1 story 

with occupant load of 5 or less and does 
not contain public use shall not be re-
quired to have accessible route. 

iii.  In detention and correctional, residential 
and boarding when they comply to mobili-
ty features as per Table 15.1., floors need 
not be connected. 

 
 
i.  Accessible routes from parking garages 

contained within and serving Type B units 
are not required to be interior. 

ii.  A single accessible route is permitted to 

pass through a kitchen or storage room in 
an Accessible unit, Type A unit or Type B 
unit. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
i.  Where security barriers incorporate ele-
ments that cannot comply with these re-
quirements, such as certain metal detec-
tors, fluoroscopes or other similar devices, 
the accessible route shall be permitted to 
be provided adjacent to security screening 
devices. The accessible route shall permit 
persons with disabilities passing around 
security barriers to maintain visual contact 
with their personal items to the same ex-
tent provided others passing through the 
security barrier. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1111 of 1348 

 

Table 15.7.: Application of Accessible Features in a Building 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

EXCEPTIONS 

 
 
i.  Loading and service entrances that are not 

the only entrance to a tenant space need 
not be accessible. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1. PUBLIC ENTRANCES 
 
i.  At least 60% of all public entranc-

es shall be accessible. 

 
2. PARKING GARAGE ENTRANCE 
 
i.  Where provided, direct access for 

pedestrians from parking struc-
tures to buildings or facility en-
trances shall be accessible 

 
3. ENTRANCE FROM TUNNEL/

ELEVATED WALKWAYS 

 
i.  Where direct access is provided 

for pedestrians from a pedestrian 
tunnel or elevated walkway to a 
building or facility, at least one 
entrance to the building or facility 
from each tunnel or walkway 
shall be accessible. 

 
4. RESTRICTED ENTRANCES 
 
i.  Where restricted entrances are 
provided to a building or facility, 
at least one restricted entrance to 
the building or facility shall be 
accessible. 

 
5. ENTRANCES FOR INMATES/

DETAINEES 

 
i.  Where entrances used only by 

inmates or detainees and security 
personnel are provided at judicial 
facilities, detention facilities or 
correctional facilities, at least one 
such entrance shall be accessible. 

 
6. SERVICE ENTRANCE 
 
i. 

If a service entrance is the only 
entrance to a building or a tenant 
space in a facility, that entrance 
shall be accessible. 

 
7. ACCESSIBE DWELLING UNITS/ 

TYPE A/ TYPE B 

 
i.  At least one accessible entrance 
shall be provided to each tenant, 
dwelling unit and sleeping unit in 
a facility. 

2. ACCESSIBLE 
ENTRANCE  

 
AS PER  
TABLE 15.1. 
AND 
ICC ANSI 117.1 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1112 of 1348 

 

 

ITEMS 

3. PARKING 
AND       
PASSENGER 
LOADING 
FACILITIES  

 
AS PER  
TABLE 15.2. 
AND 
ICC ANSI 117.1 

EXCEPTIONS 

This section 
does not apply 
to parking spac-
es used exclu-
sively for buses, 
trucks, other 
delivery vehi-
cles, law en-
forcement vehi-
cles or vehicular 
impound and 
motor pools 
where lots ac-
cessed by the 
public are pro-
vided with an 
accessible pas-
senger loading 
zone 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Table 15.7.: Application of Accessible Features in a Building 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. GENERAL 
 
i.  Where parking is provided, accessible parking spaces shall be 

provided in compliance with Table 15.2. and Table 15.7.a. 

ii.  Where more than one parking facility is provided on a site, the 
number of parking spaces required to be accessible shall be cal-
culated separately for each parking facility. 

iii.  Accessible parking spaces shall be located on the shortest acces-
sible route of travel from adjacent parking to an accessible build-
ing entrance 

iv.  Where passenger loading zones are provided, one passenger 
loading zone in every continuous 30.4 m maximum of loading 
zone space shall be accessible. 

 
2. RESIDENTIAL 
 
i.  At least 2%, but not less than one, of each type of parking space 
provided for occupancies in RESIDENTIAL OCCUPANCIES, which 
are required to have Accessible, Type A or Type B dwelling or 
sleeping units, shall be accessible.  

ii.  Where parking is provided within or beneath a building, accessi-
ble parking spaces shall also be provided within or beneath the 
building. 

 
3. HOSPITAL, GROUP B AND GROUP C (OUTPATIENT FACILITIES) 
 
i.  At least 10%, but not less than one, of patient and visitor parking 

spaces provided to serve hospital outpatient facilities shall be 
accessible. 

 
4. REHABILITATION AND OUTPATIENT PHYSICAL THERAPHY FACILI-

TIES 

 
i.  At least 20%, but not less than one, of the portion of patient and 
visitor parking spaces serving rehabilitation facilities specializing 
in treating conditions that affect mobility and outpatient physical 
therapy facilities shall be accessible. 

 
5. HEALTHCARE 
 
i.  A passenger loading zone shall be provided at an accessible en-
trance to licensed medical and long-term care facilities where 
people receive physical or medical treatment or care and where 
the period of stay exceeds 24 hours  

TOTAL PARKING SPACES PROVIDED 

MINIMUM REQUIRED ACCESSIBLE PARKINGS 

Table 15.5.a.: Number of Parking spaces required 

1. 1 TO 25 

2. 26 TO 50 

3. 51 TO 75 

4. 76 TO 100 

5. 101 TO 150 

6. 151 TO 200 

7. 201 TO 300 

8. 301 TO 400 

9. 401 TO 500 

10 501 TO 1000 

11. 1001 AND ABOVE 

 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

2% OF Total 

20, plus 1 for each 100 or fraction thereof, over 1000 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1113 of 1348 

 

Table 15.7.: Application of Accessible Features in a Building 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. REHABILITATION/ DAYCARE/ BOARD AND CARE 
 
i.  At least 4%, but not less than one, of the dwelling units and sleeping units shall be 

Accessible units as per Table 15.6.1. 

 
2. NURSING HOMES 
 
i.  At least 50% but not less than one of each type of the dwelling units and sleeping 

units shall be Accessible units. 
In structures with four or more dwelling units or sleeping units intended to be oc-
cupied as a residence, every dwelling unit and sleeping unit intended to be occu-
pied as a residence shall be a Type B unit. 

ii. 

 
3. HOSPITALS 
 
i.  At least 20%, but not less than one, of the portion of patient and visitor parking 

ii. 

spaces serving rehabilitation facilities specializing in treating conditions that affect 
mobility and outpatient physical therapy facilities shall be accessible. 
In structures with four or more dwelling units or sleeping units intended to be oc-
cupied as a residence, every dwelling unit and sleeping unit intended to be occu-
pied as a residence shall be a Type B unit. 

 
4. DETENTION AND CORRECTION 
 
i.  At least 2%, but not less than one, of the dwelling units and sleeping units shall be 

Accessible units. 

 
5. SPECIAL HOLDING CELLS OR ROOMS 
 
i. 

In addition to the Accessible units required by Table 15.7.4.4., where special hold-
ing cells or special housing cells or rooms are provided, at least one serving each 
purpose shall be an Accessible unit. Cells or rooms subject to this requirement in-
clude, but are not limited to, those used for purposes of orientation, protective 
custody, administrative or disciplinary detention or segregation, detoxification and 
medical isolation. 

 
6. RESIDENTIAL, GROUP B (BOARDING, HOSTEL) 
 
i.  Accessible units and group B units shall be provided as per Table 15.7.b. 
ii.  Accessible units shall be dispersed among the various classes of units. Roll-in show-
ers provided in Accessible units shall include a permanently mounted folding show-
er seat. 
In structures with four or more dwelling units or sleeping units intended to be oc-
cupied as a residence, every dwelling unit and sleeping unit intended to be occu-
pied as a residence shall be a Type B unit. 

iii. 

 
7. RESIDENTIAL, GROUP A (RESIDENTIAL APARTMENTS, ASSISTED LIVING) 
 
i.  Accessible units and group B units shall be provided as per Table 15.7.b. 
ii.  Where there are four or more dwelling units or sleeping units intended to be occu-

pied as a residence in a single structure, every dwelling unit and sleeping unit in-
tended to be occupied as a residence shall be a Type B unit. 

4. DWELLING 

AND    
SLEEPING 
UNITS  

 
AS PER  
TABLE 15.6. 
AND 
ICC ANSI 117.1 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1114 of 1348 

 

 

ITEMS 

4. DWELLING 

AND    
SLEEPING 
UNITS  

 
AS PER  
TABLE 15.6. 
AND 
ICC ANSI 117.1 

Table 15.7.: Application of Accessible Features in a Building 

REQUIREMENTS 

EXCEPTIONS 

8. HOTEL 
 
i.  Accessible units, Type A units and Type B units 

shall be provided in Hotel occupancies. 

ii.  Hotel occupancies, containing more than 20 

dwelling units or sleeping units, at least 2% but 
not less than one of the units shall be a Type A 
unit. 

iii.  All units on a site shall be considered to deter-

mine the total number of units and the re-
quired number of Type A units. Type A units 
shall be dispersed among the various classes of 
units. 

iv.  Where there are four or more dwelling units or 
sleeping units intended to be occupied as a res-
idence in a single structure, every dwelling unit 
and sleeping unit intended to be occupied as a 
residence shall be a Type B unit. 

 
 
9. MULTI-STORY UNITS 
 
i.  Where a multistory unit is provided with exter-
nal elevator service to only one floor, the floor 
provided with elevator service shall be the pri-
mary entry to the unit, shall comply with the 
requirements for a Type B unit and a toilet fa-
cility shall be provided on that floor. 

 
 
i.  The required number of Type 

A units and Type B units in 
Table 15.7.4. is permitted to 
be reduced as below. 

ii.  Where no elevator service is 
provided in a structure, only 
the dwelling units and sleep-
ing units that are located on 
single story, at least one story 
containing dwelling units or 
sleeping units intended to be 
occupied as a residence shall 
be provided with an accessi-
ble entrance from the exteri-
or of the structure and all 
units intended to be occupied 
as a residence on that story 
shall be Type B units. 

 
 
 
i.  A multistory dwelling or 

building provides an accessi-
ble route only to the lowest 
story containing dwelling or 
sleeping units intended to be 
occupied as a residence, only 
the units on that story which 
are intended to be occupied 
as a residence are required to 
be Type B units. 

sleeping unit which is not 
provided with elevator ser-
vice is not required to be a 
Type B unit.  

ii.  Where elevator service in the 

Table 15.5.b.: Number of Required Accessible and Sleeping Units 

TOTAL NUMBER OF 
UNITS PROVIDED 

MINIMUM REQUIRED   
NUMBER OF ACCESSIBLE 
UNITS WITHOUT          
ROLL-IN SHOWERS 

MINIMUM REQUIRED    
NUMBER OF ACCESSIBLE 
UNITS WITH                   
ROLL-IN SHOWERS 

TOTAL NUMBER OF   
REQUIRED                       
ACCESSIBLE UNITS 

1. 1 TO 25 

2. 26 TO 50 

3. 51 TO 75 

4. 76 TO 100 

5. 101 TO 150 

6. 151 TO 200 

7. 201 TO 300 

8. 301 TO 400 

9. 401 TO 500 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

0 

0 

1 

1 

2 

2 

3 

4 

4 

1 

2 

4 

5 

7 

8 

10 

12 

13 

10 501 TO 1000 

2% Of Total 

1% Of Total 

3% Of Total 

11. 1001 AND ABOVE  20, plus 1 for each 100 or 
fraction thereof, over 1000 

10, plus 1 for each 100 or 
fraction thereof, over 1000 

30, plus 2 for each 100 or 
fraction thereof, over 1000 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1115 of 1348 

 

ITEMS 

 

5. ASSEMBLY 

AREA   
SEATING  

 
AS PER  
TABLE 15.5. 
AND 
ICC ANSI 117.1 

6. TOILETS 

AND    
BATHING 

 
AS PER  
TABLE 15.6. 
AND 
ICC ANSI 117.1 

 

Table 15.7.: Application of Accessible Features in a Building 

REQUIREMENTS 

EXCEPTIONS 

In multilevel assembly 
spaces utilized for worship 
services where the second 
floor or mezzanine level 
contains 25% or less of the 
total seating capacity, 
wheelchair spaces shall be 
permitted to all be located 
on the main level. 
In multilevel assembly 
seating where the second 
floor or mezzanine level 
provides 25% or less of the 
total seating capacity and 
300 or fewer seats, all 
wheelchair spaces shall be 
permitted to be located on 
the main level. 

iii.  Wheelchair spaces in team 

or player seating serving 
areas of sport activity are 
not required to be dis-
persed. 

In buildings or facilities not 
required to provide an ac-
cessible route between 
levels, an accessible route 
to a mezzanine seating area 
is not required, provided 
that the mezzanine con-
tains less than 25% of the 
total area and the same 
services are provided in the 
accessible area. 

1. ASSEMBLY AREA WITH FIXED SEATING 
 
i.  Wheelchair spaces and companion seats shall be 

 
 
i. 

ii. 

as per Table 15.5. 
In multilevel assembly seating areas, wheelchair 
spaces shall be provided on the main floor level 
and on one of each two additional floor or mezza-
nine levels.  

iii.  Wheelchair spaces shall be provided in each luxu-

ry box, club box and suite within assembly facili-
ties. 

iv.  At least 5%, but not less than one, of the total 

ii. 

 
 
 
i. 

 

number of aisle seats provided shall be designat-
ed aisle seats and shall be the aisle seats located 
closest to accessible routes. 

v.  Lawn seating areas and exterior overflow seating 

areas, where fixed seats are not provided, shall 
connect to an accessible route. 

vi.  Each assembly area where audible communica-

tions are integral to the use of the space shall 
have an assistive listening system. 

vii.  Where stadiums, arenas and grandstands provide 

audible public announcements, they shall also 
provide equivalent text or visual information re-
garding events and facilities. 

 
2. DINING AREA 
 
i. 

In dining areas, the total floor area allotted for 
seating and tables shall be accessible. 

ii.  Where dining surfaces for the consumption of 
food or drink are provided, at least 5%, but not 
less than one, of the dining surfaces for the 
seating and standing spaces shall be accessible 
and be distributed throughout the facility and 
located on a level accessed by an accessible 
route. 

i.  Accessible toilets and bathrooms shall be as per 

Table 15.6. 

ii.  Family or assisted-use bathing rooms shall include 

only one shower or bathtub fixture. Family or as-
sisted-use bathing rooms shall also include one 
water closet and one lavatory. Where storage 
facilities are provided for separate-sex bathing 
rooms, accessible storage facilities shall be pro-
vided for family or assisted-use bathing rooms. 
iii.  Family or assisted-use toilet and bathing rooms 

shall be located on an accessible route. 

iv.  The accessible route from any separate-sex toilet 
room to a family or assisted-use toilet room shall 
not exceed 152 m. 
In passenger transportation facilities and airports, 
the accessible route from separate-sex toilet 
rooms to a family or assisted-use toilet room shall 
not pass through security checkpoints. 

v. 

vi.  Where doors swing into a family or assisted-use 

toilet or bathing room, a clear floor space not less 
than 762 mm by 1219 mm shall be provided, 
within the room, beyond the area of the door 
swing  

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1116 of 1348 

 

Table 15.7.: Application of Accessible Features in a Building 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. ASSEMBLY, MERCANTILE, MALL 
 
i.  An accessible family or assisted-use toilet room shall be provided where an aggre-

gate of six or more male and female water closets is required. In buildings of mixed 
occupancy, only those water closets required for the assembly or mercantile occu-
pancy shall be used to determine the family or assisted-use toilet room require-
ment. 

 
2. RECREATIONAL FACILITIES 
 
i. 

In recreational facilities where separate-sex bathing rooms are provided, an acces-
sible family or assisted-use bathing room shall be provided. Fixtures located within 
family or assisted-use toilet and bathing rooms shall be included in determining 
the number of fixtures provided in an occupancy. 

i.  Where check-out aisles are provided, accessible check-out aisles shall be provided 
in accordance with Table 15.7.c. Where check-out aisles serve different functions, 
at least one accessible check-out aisle shall be provided for each function.  

ii.  Where check-out aisles serve different functions, accessible check-out aisles shall 

be provided in accordance with Table 15.7.c. for each function.  

iii.  Where check-out aisles are dispersed throughout the building or facility, accessible 

iv.  Traffic control devices, security devices and turnstiles located in accessible check-

check-out aisles shall also be dispersed.  

out aisles or lanes shall be accessible. 

i.  Where dressing rooms, fitting rooms or locker rooms are provided, at least 5%, but 

not less than one, of each type of use in each cluster provided shall be accessible. 

i.  Queue and waiting lines for food, tickets or servicing accessible counters or check-

out aisles shall be accessible. 

6. TOILETS 

AND    
BATHING 

 
AS PER  
TABLE 15.6. 
AND 
ICC ANSI 117.1 

7. CHECK-OUT 

AISLES 

 
AS PER  
TABLE 15.1. 
AND 
ICC ANSI 117.1 

8. DRESSING, 

FITTING AND 
LOCKER 
ROOMS 

 
AS PER  
TABLE 15.1. 
AND 
ICC ANSI 117.1 

9. QUEUE AND 

WAITING 
LINES 

 
AS PER  
TABLE 15.1. 
AND 
ICC ANSI 117.1 

Table 15.5.c.: Number of Required Accessible Check-Out Aisles 

TOTAL CHECK-OUT AISLES 
OF EACH FUNCTION 

MINIMUM REQUIRED   NUMBER OF ACCESSIBLE CHECK-OUT AISLES OF 
EACH FUNCTION 

1. 1 TO 4 

2. 5 TO 8 

3. 9 TO 15 

4. OVER 15 

 

 

1 

2 

3 

3 Plus 20% of additional Aisles 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1117 of 1348 

5. Emergency Evacuation Strategies for People with Determination.  
 

5.1.  General  
 

5.1.1.  The five general categories of physical disabilities are 
 

a.  Mobility Impairment 
b.  Visual Impairment 
c.  Hearing Impairment 
d.  Speech Impairment 
e.  Cognitive Impairment 
 

5.1.2.  The major emergency evacuation components in a building or structure are  
 

a.  Emergency Notification (Alarm) 
b.  Means of Egress 
 

5.1.3.  The Challenges faced by physically people with determination can be as obvious as 

not being able to alert themselves with building emergency notification systems 
and when alerted, not being able to maneuver through building features for safe 
evacuation.  

 
5.1.4.  To overcome these challenges buildings need to be “Accessible” providing audio 

and visual alarm notifications and provide accessible routes and features that ena-
ble people with determination to maneuver easily to safety during emergencies. 

 
5.1.5.  Following guidelines shall be followed to prepare emergency strategies in buildings 

depending on the presence of people with various disabilities. 

 

5.2.  Evacuation of Mobility Impaired People 
 

5.2.1.  Mobility Impaired people may not have difficulty in hearing or looking. The stand-

ard building Fire Alarm and visual notification signals will serve their purpose to 
alert mobility impaired people and warn them of the emergency and need to va-
cate the building. 

 
5.2.2.  The building shall have accessible routes in compliance with this chapter, providing 

accessible circulation paths, accessible doors, accessible refuge areas, accessible 
stairs and accessible elevators. 

 
5.2.3.  The building Signage and Notification systems shall comply with this chapter and 
shall clearly identify the accessible routes to enable the mobility impaired people 
to find the accessible routes easily and quickly. 

 
5.2.4.  Where mobility impaired people can not use the accessible routes and need assis-
tance, area of refuge such as dedicated area of refuges, corridors of non fire floors 
or exit stair landings can provide temporary safety from emergency situations in 
the building. 

 
5.2.5.  Where accessible elevators are provided and are part of building evacuation strat-
egy,  facility management or Civil Defence personnel can initiate mobility impaired 
people evacuation using such elevators. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1118 of 1348 

 

5.2.6.  Where mobility impaired people can not use the accessible routes and elevators  
not available for evacuation, they need assistance from first responders, Civil De-
fence personnel, fellow people, neighbors, colleagues, depending on the type of 
occupancy. Some of the evacuation devices, methods and stair descent devices 
also need assistance from abled people.  

 
5.2.7.  Written or electronic copy of the evacuation procedures and evacuation floor plans 

will enable them for emergency evacuation. 

 
5.2.8.  Foldable wheel chairs shall be provided in every facility. Such wheel chairs shall be 

stored in easily accessible location. The number of spare wheel chairs shall be in 
accordance with the number of mobility impaired people in the building. However, 
minimum of 2 such wheel chairs shall be available in all occupancies. The facility 
management shall be trained in usage, maintenance and storing of wheel chairs. 

 

5.3.  Evacuation of Visually Impaired People 
 

5.3.1.  Visually Impaired people may not have difficulty in hearing or walking. The stand-
ard building Fire Alarm, public address system and audio notification signals will 
serve their purpose to alert Visually impaired people and warn them of the emer-
gency and need to vacate the building. 

 
5.3.2.  The building shall have accessible routes in compliance with this chapter, providing 

accessible circulation paths, accessible doors, accessible refuge areas, accessible 
stairs and accessible elevators. 

 
5.3.3.  The building exit and directional signage and Notification systems shall comply 

with this chapter and shall clearly identify the accessible routes and usable circula-
tion paths to enable the visually impaired people to find the accessible routes. Pro-
vision of tactile signs, braille character signage on evacuation plans, in circulation 
paths, stairs and elevators will enable visually impaired people to find their way to 
safety easily and comfortably.  

 
5.3.4.  New visually impaired people at offices, residential buildings and hospitals should 
be shown the evacuation plans with tactile and braille signage to familiarize them 
with options of accessible routes to safety during emergencies. 

 
5.3.5.  Handrails shall be provided at all exit stairs as per this chapter so that visually im-

paired people can maneuver through exits without assistance. 

 
5.3.6.  Where visually impaired people can not navigate through the building, one abled 
person can lead a single or group of visually impaired people to safety and to exit 
discharge during fire emergencies. 

 

5.4.  Evacuation of Hearing Impaired People 
 

5.4.1.  Hearing Impaired people may not have difficulty in seeing or walking. The standard 

building Fire Alarm with flashing strobe, visual notification signals will serve their 
purpose to alert hearing impaired people and warn them of the emergency and 
need to vacate the building. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1119 of 1348 

 

5.4.2.  However, hearing impaired people should be aware in advance which types of vis-
ual alarms are triggered in the building in response to what kind of emergencies. 
Fire emergencies in particular location might trigger visual alarms where as other 
areas may not trigger alarms but still need to evacuate. Alternative methods of 
notification need to be put into the emergency evacuation plans for people with 
hearing impairments so they can get all the information they need to evacuate in a 
timely manner. 

 
5.4.3.  Where hearing impaired people work and live, manual alarms triggered by neigh-

bors and colleagues to warn about non-fire emergencies such as earthquakes, 
storms, criminal invasion etc. 

 
5.4.4. 

In assembly areas, malls and roads, visual scrolling reader boards shall be installed 
to warn the hearing impaired people to notify the emergency situations. 

 
5.4.5.  Once the hearing impaired people are warned effectively about the need to evacu-
ate, the usage of standard exits and means of egress is natural for the hearing im-
paired to find safety of the exterior of building using standard floor plans and visu-
al directional signage. 

 
5.4.6.  Written or electronic copy of the evacuation procedures and evacuation floor plans 

will enable them for emergency evacuation. 

 

5.5.  Evacuation of Speech Impaired People 
 

5.5.1.  Speech Impaired people may not have difficulty in hearing, seeing or walking. The-

se people may not be able to alert other abled people during emergencies. The 
standard building Fire Alarm, public address system and audio/visual notification 
signals will serve their purpose to alert speech impaired people and warn them of 
the emergency and need to vacate the building. 

 
5.5.2.  Once the speech impaired people are warned in a standard method about the 

need to evacuate, the speech impaired people can follow the standard means of 
egress to safety without any assistance. 

 
5.5.3.  Written or electronic copy of the evacuation procedures and evacuation floor plans 

will enable them for emergency evacuation. 

 

5.6.  Evacuation of Cognitive Impaired People 
 

5.6.1.  Cognitive impairments prevent a person from using or accessing building features 
due to an inability to process or understand the information necessary to use the 
features. Cognitive impairments are caused by a wide range of conditions, but all 
result in some decreased level of ability to process or understand information, 
communications or situations. 

 
5.6.2.  Standard building features and notification systems are sufficient for cognitive im-

paired people. however, their ability to understand and process the information to 
take decisions needs evaluation and verification which needs to be established be-
fore hand and emergency procedures are to be in place for such people. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1120 of 13485.6.3. 

If the evaluation confirms the ability of cognitive impaired peoples capability to 
evacuate using standard features of building, without assistance, then these peo-
ple will follow alarm notifications and directional signage to reach safety. If not, 
then cognitive impaired people should be provided with assistance always to reach 
them to safety. 

 
 
 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1121 of 1348Chapter 16 
SMART MONITORING SYSTEM 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1122 of 1348In this Chapter: 

Î Smart monitoring system 
Î Specifications and system requirements for smart 

monitoring system 

Intent of the Chapter 

•  To  monitor  city  buildings  for  fire  alarms,  fire  and  life  safety 
systems’  faults  and  to  ensure  building  service  systems’  good 
working condition through direct annunciation to Civil Defence 
control  rooms. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1123 of 1348 

In this Chapter : 

  Smart Monitoring System 

  Specifications  and system 

requirements for smart 
monitoring system 

Intent of the Chapter 

  To monitor city buildings for fire alarms, fire and life 

safety systems’ faults and to ensure building service 
systems’ good working condition through direct 
annunciation to Civil Defence control rooms. 

 

1. Definitions 

1.1. General 

It is a mandatory requirement by Civil Defence. 

1.1.1.  Shall  
 
 
1.1.2.  Should 
 
 
1.1.3.  Listed 
 
 
1.1.4.  Smart Monitoring System  
 

 
  

It is a suggested requirement recommended by Civil Defence but not mandatory. 

Approved and registered by individual Emirates’ Civil Defence material department. 

Connection or annunciation of building fire and life safety systems signals directly to 
Civil Defence monitoring systems. 

 

 
 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1124 of 1348 

2.  Smart Monitoring System 

 

2.1.  General 

 

2.1.1.  Civil Defence has made a commitment to enhance Life Safety and National Security 

in UAE by implementing the Smart monitoring System. 

 
2.1.2.  Smart monitoring System will detect and report alarms in real time from Fire and 

Life Safety Systems, Fire water tanks, Elevators and LP Gas detection systems of the 
buildings, directly to Civil Defence control and monitoring rooms. 

 
2.1.3.  The system provides Civil Defence with the following: 
 

2.1.3.1.  Unified monitoring and operating base to deal with fire emergencies 

effectively and timely. 

2.1.3.2.  Monitor Fire and Life Safety systems of City buildings round the clock. 
2.1.3.3.  Supervise Fire and Life Safety systems faults and intimate building owners 

immediately for corrective measures. 

2.1.3.4.  Access to a master database of building details, fire and life safety system 

information, nature of occupancy, nature of hazard, details of adjacent 
buildings etc. to ensure instant and appropriate dispatch of fire trucks, 
rescue vehicles and equipment to the reported accident scene. 

 

2.2.  Applicability 

 

2.2.1.  Every building in UAE, including private villas, warehouses and factories shall be 

connected to Civil Defence through Smart and Direct Alarm Systems. 

 
2.2.2.  Such a Direct Alarm Systems shall be a smart system, utilizing state of the art tech-
nology and shall be able to annunciate and communicate with building fire and life 
safety systems, remotely from Civil Defence control rooms. 

 
2.2.3.  Smart monitoring Systems shall be specified by the individual Emirates’ Civil De-

fence. 

 
2.2.4.  It is building owner and project consultant’s responsibility to identify and acquire 

these requirements through individual Emirates’ Civil Defence. 

 
2.2.5.  The requirements in this chapter are general guidelines for the smart monitoring 
System. Systems having smart, audio, visual features utilizing cloud technologies, 
wireless technologies, exceeding the requirements of this chapter shall be per-
mitted and acceptable. 

 
2.2.6.  It is building owner and project consultant’s responsibility to provide infrastructure, 

system features, necessary provisions for interfacing in accordance with the smart 
monitoring system specifications as required by the individual Emirates’ Civil De-
fence. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1125 of 1348 

2.3. Specifications 

 

2.3.1. 

The minimum specifications of the smart monitoring System shall be in accord-
ance with Table 16.1. 

Table 16.1: Smart Monitoring System Specifications 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  SIGNALS FROM 

BUILDING 

1.  ALARMS 
 
i.  As a minimum, the following “Alarm” signals from a building shall be annunci-

ated to Civil Defence through Smart monitoring System.                                                                                                                     
a. ‘Fire Alarm’ from Fire Detection and Alarm Control Panel (FACP)                                      
b. ‘Low Water level’ alarm from building Fire Water Tank                                                      
c. ‘LP Gas or Natural Gas leakage’ alarm from building gas detection system      
d. ‘Fire Pump in operation’ annunciation from building fire pump controller  
e. ‘Diesel Fuel Low’ signal from Diesel Fire Pump controller                                         
f. ‘Pressure Low’ signal from fire water line                                                                             
g. ‘Passenger Alarm’ signal from Lift control panel                                                               

 
2.    FAULTS 
 
i.  As a minimum, the following “Fault” signals from a building shall be annunciat-

ed to Civil Defence through Smart monitoring System.                                                                                                                     
a. ‘Fault’ from Fire Detection and Alarm Control Panel (FACP)                                        
b. ‘Fault’ from Fire Pump Controller                                                                                
c. ‘Fault’ from LP Gas or natural gas control panel                                                                   
d. ‘Fault’ from Smoke Control Panel (SCP)                                                                                       
e. ‘Fault’ from elevator control panel                                                                                          
f. ‘Fault’ from Emergency Lighting control panel  

2.  PROVISIONS 
REQUIRED IN 
THE BUILDING 

 

1. GENERAL 
 
i. 

It is owner and consultant’s responsibility to provide the required features, 
interfacing accessibility, protocols and necessary wiring as per smart monitor-
ing system specifications from individual Emirates’ Civil Defence. However, 
following minimum features shall be available in the building for smart moni-
toring system interfacing. 
Smart monitoring system Interfacing panel shall be located in an approved 
location, preferably next to main FACP, security rooms, reception or Emer-
gency Command Center. Interfacing panel shall not be located at the base-
ment or outside the building. 

ii. 

iii.  A minimum space of 800mm x 800mm x 500mm shall be available at 1.5 m 

above the finished floor level. 

iv.  There shall be excellent cellular signal coverage at the interfacing panel loca-

tion. 

v.  Proper terminals for electrical connectivity shall be available in the interfac-

ing panel. 

Interfacing panel shall have earthing. 

vi.  230V AC power supply terminals within the interface panel shall be available. 
vii. 
 
 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1126 of 1348 

Table 16.1: Smart Monitoring System Specifications 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

2.  PROVISIONS 
REQUIRED IN 
THE BUILDING 

2. LOWRISE AND MIDRISE BUILDINGS 
 
i.  Dedicated volt free contacts (VFC) in the FACP shall be available. The state of 

the VFC should ideally be normally closed (NC) during normal condition and 
open (NO) during alarm condition, for                                                                                        
a. Common fire alarm from FACP                                                                                                
b. Common fire alarm system fault from FACP 

ii.  Dedicated volt free contacts (VFC) in the Fire Pump Controller shall be availa-

ble. The state of the VFC should ideally be normally closed (NC) during normal 
condition and open (NO) during alarm condition, for                                                                                        
a. Fire Pump in operation                                                                                                                
b. Common system fault from controller                                                                                     
c. System Pressure Low                                                                                                                    
d. Diesel fuel low                                                                                                                            
e. Water tank level low 

iii. Dedicated volt free contacts (VFC) in the Gas control panel shall be available. 

The state of the VFC should ideally be normally closed (NC) during normal con-
dition and open (NO) during alarm condition, for                                                                                        
a. Gas leak detection                                                                                                                         
b. Common system fault from control panel   

iv. Dedicated volt free contacts (VFC) in the Elevator control panel shall be availa-
ble. The state of the VFC should ideally be normally closed (NC) during normal 
condition and open (NO) during fault condition, for                                                                                        
a. Common elevator fault from control panel                                                                                
b. Passenger Alarm from elevator control panel.                                                                                  

 

Figure 16.1.:  Typical Smart Monitoring System Concept 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1127 of 1348 

 

Table 16.1: Smart Monitoring System Specifications 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

2.  PROVISIONS 
REQUIRED IN 
THE BUILDING 

3. HIGHRISE AND SUPERHIGH RISE BUILDINGS 
 
3.a. SMART BUILDINGS WITH OPEN PROTOCOLS 
 
i.  Where buildings are provided with FACP’s, Smoke control panel, Gas detection 
panel, Fire pump controllers and elevator control panels with state of the art In-
ternet or things (IoT) features OR building has ‘Smart’ features OR building has 
BMS (Building Management Systems), open protocols shall be made available to 
achieve the required signal annunciation and communication as per Table 16.1.1. 

ii.  The acceptable open protocols shall be such as following                                                        
a. BACnet IP                                                                                                                                        
b. BACnet MSTP                                                                                                                                   
c. Modbus TCP                                                                                                                                   
d. Modbust RTU with RS485 ports                                                                                                
e. Lonworks  

 
3.b. BUILDINGS WITHOUT OPEN PROTOCOLS 
 
i.  Dedicated volt free contacts (VFC) in the FACP shall be available. The state of the 

VFC should ideally be normally closed (NC) during normal condition and open 
(NO) during alarm condition, for                                                                                        
a. Common fire alarm from FACP                                                                                                
b. Common fire alarm system fault from FACP 

ii.  Dedicated volt free contacts (VFC) in the Fire Pump Controller shall be available. 
The state of the VFC should ideally be normally closed (NC) during normal condi-
tion and open (NO) during alarm condition, for                                                                                        
a. Fire Pump in operation                                                                                                                
b. Common fire pump system fault from controller                                                                                     
c. System Pressure Low                                                                                                                    
d. Diesel fuel low                                                                                                                            
e. Water tank level low 

iii. Dedicated volt free contacts (VFC) in the Gas control panel shall be available. The 

state of the VFC should ideally be normally closed (NC) during normal condition 
and open (NO) during alarm condition, for                                                                                        
a. Gas leak detection                                                                                                                         
b. Common gas detection system fault from control panel      

iv. Dedicated volt free contacts (VFC) in the Smoke control panel shall be available. 
The state of the VFC should ideally be normally closed (NC) during normal condi-
tion and open (NO) during fault condition, for                                                                                        
a. Common system fault from control panel                                                                                       

v.  Dedicated volt free contacts (VFC) in the Elevator control panel shall be available. 

The state of the VFC should ideally be normally closed (NC) during normal condi-
tion and open (NO) during fault condition, for                                                                                        
a. Common elevator fault from control panel                                                                                
b. Passenger Alarm from elevator control panel                                                                                     

vi. Dedicated volt free contacts (VFC) in the Emergency lighting control panel shall 
be available. The state of the VFC should ideally be normally closed (NC) during 
normal condition and open (NO) during fault condition, for                                                                                        
a. Common system fault from control panel                                                            

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1128 of 1348Chapter 17 
RISK ASSESSMENT 
METHODOLOGY 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1129 of 1348In this Chapter: 
Î FRA (Fire Risk Assessment) methodology. 
Î Various RA models. 
Î RA report requirements. 
Î Operation and maintenance for RA validity. 

Intent of the Chapter 

•  To provide an over view of methods of conducting fire risk 

assessment  (FRA)  studies. 

•  To provide guideline for analysis and evaluation of fire risk 

assessment (FRA) for a given fire safety problem. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1130 of 1348 

In this Chapter : 

Intent of the Chapter  

  FRA (Fire Risk Assessment) 

methodology. 

  Various RA models. 

  RA Report requirements. 

  Operation and maintenance for 

RA validity. 

  To provide an over view of methods of conducting Fire 

Risk Assessment (FRA) Studies. 

  To provide guideline for analysis and evaluation of  Fire 
Risk Assessment (FRA) for a given fire safety problem. 

1. Definitions 
   

1.1. General 

It is a mandatory requirement by Civil Defence 

It is a suggested requirement recommended by Civil Defence but not mandatory. 

 
1.1.1.  Shall  
 
 
1.1.2.  Should 
 
 
1.1.3.  Listed 
 
 
1.1.4.  Approved 
 

Approved and registered by individual Emirates’ Civil Defence material department. 

Approved and registered by individual Emirates’ Civil Defence material department. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1131 of 1348 

 

1.2. Risk Assessment 

 
1.2.1.  Fire Risk Assessment (FRA)  
 

A process to characterize the risk associated with fire that addresses the fire scenario or 
fire scenarios of concern, their probability, and their potential consequences. 

 
1.2.2.  Acceptance Criteria 
 

Acceptance criteria are the units and threshold values against which a fire risk assessment 
is judged. 

 
1.2.3.  Consequence 
 
 
1.2.4.  Event 
 

The outcome of an event, which may be expressed qualitatively or quantitatively. 

The occurrence of a particular set of circumstances, whether certain or uncertain and 
whether singular or multiple . 

 
1.2.5.  Fire Scenario 
 

A fire scenario is a set of conditions and events that characterizes the development of 
fire, the spread of combustion products, the reactions of people, and the effect of com-
bustion products. 

 
1.2.6.  Hazard 
 

A condition that presents the potential for harm or damage to people, property, environ-
ment, mission, or cultural heritage. 

The average number of times an event is repeated in a given period. 

The likelihood of an occurrence as expressed as a number between 0 and 1, and the basis 
of which is often expressed over a period of time or number of trials. 

 
1.2.7.  Frequency 
 
 
1.2.8.  Probability 
 

 
1.2.9.  Likelihood 
 
 
1.2.10.  Risk 
 

Frequency, probability, or their combination. 

The paired probabilities and consequences for possible undesired events associated with 
a given facility or process. 

Simulation of an event. 

 
1.2.11.  Model 
 
 
1.2.12.  Method 
 
 
1.2.13.  Probabilistic Method 
 

A process or technique to help resolve a model. 

A model whose outputs are probabilities or probability distributions. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1132 of 1348 
1.1.14.  Deterministic Model  
 

A model whose outputs are not probabilities or probability distributions; that is, they do 
not quantify uncertainty. 

 
1.1.15.  Semi quantitative Methods  
 

Methods that are based on the ability or need to quantify either the likelihood or the con-
sequence of a fire event or events. 

 
1.1.16.  Scenario Cluster  
 
 
1.1.17.  Stakeholder  
 

A group of scenarios having some, but not all, defining characteristics in common. 

Any individual, group, or organization that might affect, be affected by, or perceive itself 
to be affected by the risk. 
 

1.1.18.  Validation  
 

The process of determining the correctness of the assumptions and governing equations 
implemented in a method. 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1133 of 1348 

2.  Risk Assessment (RA) Studies and Reports 

 

2.1.  Defining the problem 

The purpose of conducting the FRA should be identified and documented. The pur-
pose might be to identify the level of risk present in an existing building or facility, 
to identify methods of lowering the risk in an existing building or facility, or to 
identify methods of providing a level of risk deemed acceptable in a new or reno-
vated building or facility. 

2.1.1. 

 
2.1.2. 

The objectives of the FRA might be associat-
ed with the risk to life (occupants or fire 
fighters), the risk to property, the risk to op-
erations (e.g., cost of business interruption), 
the risk to the environment, or the risk of 
loss of cultural resources.  

 

2.2.  Elements of Risk 

2.2.1. 

 

The elements at risk should be identified. 
these elements could be any or all of the 
following. 

2.2.1.1.  People (occupants, employees, 

general public, emergency re-
sponders). 

 
2.2.1.2.  Property (structures, systems, com-
ponents of the built environment)  

 
2.2.1.3.  Environment (national parks, mon-

uments, hazardous materials) 

 
2.2.1.3.  Mission (heritage, business continui-

ty, information/ communication) 

 

Did You Know? 

4 Simple questions can 

lead you to assess fire 

risks (Conduct RA) 

around you. 

1.  Is source of Ignition 

and Fuel present? 

2.  Will People,        
Business and     
Property be affected? 

3.  How to reduce 

chances of fire       
accident and impact? 

4.  Is everyone around 
you aware of these 
questions and their 
answers? 

2.3.  Guidelines for conducting Risk Assessment 

2.3.1. 

Risk analysis should be based on various hazard assessment methods. The RA doc-
umentation should include a brief description of these methods of solution, nu-
merical computations (including identification of units used), and identification of 
the source or derivation of all equations that are not in common usage. 

 
2.3.2.  Methods may include a variety of elements based on the problem definition. These 
elements may be qualitative or quantitative and may involve deterministic or prob-
abilistic models. 

 
2.3.3. 

As a general guideline, Table 17.1. should be followed for Risk Assessment meth-
ods.  

 
2.3.4.  NFPA 550, NFPA 551, NFPA Handbooks have been referred for this chapter. Con-
sultants and House of Expertise shall refer to these documents for further details 
and RA methodology. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1134 of 1348 

 

Table 17.1: Guidelines for Risk Assessment 

OCCUPANCY 

REQUIRMENTS 

1. GENERAL    

i. 

 

 

ii. 

As a first step in Risk Assessment, PHA (Preliminary Hazard Analysis) shall be 
carried out followed by detailed examination by other known hazard analysis 
method such as HAZOP studies.  
The Risk Assessment Study should evaluate all possible risks arising within the 
premises/operations and/or off- site due to the operations and recommend 
necessary mitigation measures. 

iii.  A detailed evaluation of regular/irregular operations, activities, tasks and 
main installations, including physical-chemical characteristics of materials 
being stored/handled/processed, quantitative data on amounts, volumes, 
production/storage conditions etc. shall be carried out.  

iv.  Site suitability with regard to wind, flooding etc. shall be evaluated. 
v. 

FAULT TREE and EVENT TREE analysis shall be carried out to provide a graphic 
description of the accident sequences associated with plant operations and 
storage.  

vi.  Evaluate/Clarify risks (Frequency, Severity and Probability) using accepted 

Risk Assessment Technique and Criteria leading to determination of risks to 
be eliminated or controlled.  

vii.  Accident Consequence Analysis and its effects on human, environment and 

nearby installations and site shall be analyzed.  

viii.  Provide for clarification of risks and identification of those to be eliminated or 

controlled.  

ix.  Evaluate Fire & Explosion hazard using F & EI Index.  
x. 
xi.  Evaluate Hazardous materials classification based on internationally accepted 

Evaluate Fire Protection System, Alarm System and Ventilation systems.  

standards such as NFPA, U.N. or International Maritime Dangerous Goods 
(IMDG) code, etc.  

xii.  Hazardous Area Classification and identification with mapping of the pro-

posed facility shall be carried out.  

xiii.  Effects of emergency situations/major environmental events such as light-

ning, flooding and acts of mischief or sabotage shall be analyzed.  

xiv.  Evaluate occupational health hazards & environmental risks involved in pro-

cess and operations.  

xv.  For all of the above, measures should be developed and recommended for 
technical and organizational protection to bring down risks AS LOW AS REA-
SONABLY PRACTICABLE.  

xvi.  Develop ON SITE & OFF SITE emergency action plan in co-ordination with Civil 

Defence.  

xvii.  Wherever a risk/operation/situation cannot be managed feasibly, it shall be 

the duty of the consultant to highlight the same in the report.   

2. LIKELIHOOD 

i. 

AND                   

CONSEQUENCE 

ii. 

The evaluation of likelihood may be based on past experience (e.g., statistics) 
for well-understood events or on a combination of available knowledge and 
accepted mathematical treatment (subjective) for less-understood events 
and where uncertainty and variability are high. 
The evaluation of consequences may be based on expert knowledge (e.g., risk 
indices), probabilistic modeling (e.g., life safety tree to arrive at safe or unsafe 
conditions), or deterministic modeling (e.g., fire growth, smoke spread, and 
occupant evacuation to arrive at safe or unsafe conditions). 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1135 of 1348 

 

Table 17.1: Guidelines for Risk Assessment 

OCCUPANCY 

REQUIRMENTS 

1.  GENERAL 
 
i. 

The FRA should address the risk contribution from all potentially significant 
fire scenarios. When approximations are used (e.g., the risk contribution from 
a single fire scenario is used as a basis for estimating the risk from a wider 
range of fire scenarios), the approximations should be justified in the context 
of the decision problem. 
The objective in selecting the fire scenarios to be analyzed is to find a set of 
scenarios that are sufficiently diverse and representative such that analyzing 
the risk for these scenarios captures the overall fire risk for the facility. 

ii. 

 
2.  FIRE IGNITION 
 
i.  Often based on the most probable event in a particular setting, for example, 
cigarette ignition of a couch in a living room. Prevention education would re-
duce the probability of occurrence of this event and the consequential risks.  

 
3.  FIRE GROWTH 
 
i. 

Based on all probable developments of a fire, from smoldering to flashover 
fires. Fire protection systems such as sprinklers, compartmentation and door 
closers may help to contain these fires and to reduce their consequential 
risks. The reduction in risk depends on the reliability and effectiveness of the 
fire control systems. 

 
4.  SMOKE GROWTH 
 
i. 

Based on smoke spread to critical egress routes and other parts in a building. 
Fire protection systems such as smoke control and stairwell pressurization 
may help to contain the smoke and to reduce its consequential risks. The re-
duction in risk depends on the reliability and effectiveness of the smoke con-
trol systems. 

 
5.  EXPOSURE OF OCCUPANTS 
 
i. 

Based on smoke and fire blocking egress routes. Fire protection systems such 
as fire alarms, voice communication, clear egress routes, and refuge areas 
may help to provide early warning to occupants and to direct them either to 
evacuate the building or to seek refuge in certain areas. The reduction in risk 
depends on the reliability and effectiveness of the warning and evacuation 
systems. 

 
6.  FAILURE OF CIVIL DEFENCE EARLY RESPONSE 
 
i. 

Based on no response or late response. Proper notification procedure and 
adequate fire department resources would help to rescue the trapped occu-
pants or to control the fire. The reduction in risk depends on the reliability of 
the notification procedure and the adequacy of fire department resources. 

 

3. FIRE SCENARIOS 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1136 of 1348 

 

Table 17.1: Guidelines for Risk Assessment 

OCCUPANCY 

REQUIRMENTS 

4. RA METHODS 

i. 

 

 

5 RA methodologies mentioned below are defined in Table 17.1.a.                
a. Qualitative method.                                                                                              
b. Semiquantitative likelihood method.                                                                 
c. Semiquantitative consequence method                                                            
d. Quantitative method.                                                                                            
e. Cost benefit risk methods. 

CATEGORY 

DEFINITION 

TYPE OF OUTPUT 

EXAMPLES 

Table 17.1.a: RA Methodology 

1. QUALITATIVE 

METHOD 

Treats both likelihood 
and consequences 
qualitatively. 

2. SEMI         

QUALITATIVE 

METHOD  

Treats likelihood 
quantitatively and 
consequences quali-
tatively 

3. SEMI        

QUANTITAIVE 

CONSEQUENCE 

METHOD 

4. QUANTITATIVE 

METHOD 

Treats consequences 
quantitatively and 
likelihood qualitative-
ly. 

Combines quantita-
tive estimates of like-
lihood and conse-
quences. 

5. COST BENEFIT 

RISK METHODS 

Include determina-
tion of costs of alter-
native approaches to 
limit consequences 
and/or likelihoods 

 

Tabulations of outcome and 
relative likelihood of various 
fire scenarios and how they 
are affected by various pro-
tection options. 

Determination of frequency 
of occurrence of different 
types of fires and/or fires 
with different types of pro-
tection. 

i.  What-if analyses 
ii.  Risk matrices 
iii. Risk indices 
iv. Fire safety concepts tree 

i.  Actuarial/loss statistical 

analyses 

ii.  Stand-alone event tree 

analyses 

Deterministic fire model 
outputs with qualitative rep-
resentation of likelihood 

i.  Enclosure fire models for 
selected challenging fire 
scenarios 

i.  Determination of loss 

expectancy OR 

ii.  Determination of proba-

bility of flashover OR 

iii.  Determination of proba-
bility of fatalities in oth-
er rooms or floors of 
building OR 

iv.  Plot of frequency versus 
number of fatalities OR 
v.  Plot of frequency versus 

size of loss OR 

vi.  Determination of likeli-
hood of injuries, fatali-
ties, property damage, 
and business interrup-
tion OR 

vii. Determination of indi-
vidual risk (to building 
occupants) and of socie-
tal risk (to entire popula-
tion) 

i.  Determination of costs 
required to achieve vari-
ous levels of risk reduc-
tion OR 

ii.  Determination of 

“optimum” level of fire 
protection based on 
minimizing “overall risk” 
or some other risk crite-
rion 

i.  FRAs to determine proba-
bility of reactor-core melt 
due to fire at a nuclear 
power plant Event tree 
analysis combined with 
fire models. 

i.  Computational models 

that incorporate probabil-
ity, consequences, and 
cost data in an integrated 
manner  

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1137 of 1348 

 

Table 17.1: Guidelines for Risk Assessment 

OCCUPANCY 

REQUIRMENTS 

1.  GENERAL 
 
i.  Fire Models are generally computer models that implement a mathematical 
model simulating a process or phenomenon based on the input parameters. 
ii.  These computer fire models can provide a faster and more accurate estimate 

of the impact of a fire and the measures used to prevent or control the fire 
than many of the methods previously used. Thus they serve as important tool 
is RA studies. 

iii.   Fire Models can be categorized broadly into two interrelated types.                                                

a. Physical.                                                                                                                     
b. Mathematical. 

 
2. PHYSICAL MODELS 
 
i.  Physical models attempt to reproduce fire phenomena in a simplified physical 

situation. Scale models are a widespread form of modeling, as full-scale ex-
periments are expensive, difficult, and sometimes not feasible. Often the goal 
of physical models is to uncover laws governing the behavior of physical/
chemical systems. 

 
3. MATHEMATICAL MODELS 
 
i.  Mathematical models are sets of equations that describe the behavior of a 
physical system. The resulting mathematical model can then be used to pre-
dict the behavior of real physical systems. Mathematical models can be fur-
ther classified into two types.                                                                                    
a. Deterministic Models                                                                                              
b. Probabilistic Models 

 
3.a. DETERMINISTIC  MODELS 
 
i. 

In a deterministic model, the quantities being modeled are treated as being 
completely certain — the purpose of the model is to provide an estimate of 
these quantities. For example, in a conventional deterministic zone model for 
compartment fires, the average hot gas layer temperature at any given point 
in time is computed as having a single, known value.  

ii.  Deterministic fire models can range from simple one-line correlations of data 
to highly complex models requiring weeks of computing time using dozens of 
computers. The unifying aspect of these models is that the course of a fire is 
fixed by the variables that establish the environment in which it occurs. The 
physical conditions that determine the progress and outcome of the fire are 
dependent on the fire scenarios, discussed earlier. 

iii.  Deterministic models can incorporate our empirical knowledge of fire phe-

nomena and the calculations focus on the interaction of objects, such as fire 
sources and layers through equations describing conservation of mass and 
energy. These models are relatively simple so that very large buildings can be 
modeled using these techniques. The most identifiable field model is the 
computational fluid dynamics (CFD) model. 

 

5. FIRE MODELS 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1138 of 1348 

 

OCCUPANCY 

REQUIRMENTS 

Table 17.1: Guidelines for Risk Assessment 

3.b. PROBABILISTIC  MODELS 
 
i. 

In a probabilistic model, the quantities being modeled are treated as being 
uncertain — the purpose of the model is to quantify the degree of uncertain-
ty in these quantities. For example, in addressing the availability of a fire sup-
pression system, it is uncertain whether the system is operational at any giv-
en point in time. A state transition model representing the various states of 
the suppression system may be used to quantify the time-dependent likeli-
hood that the system is operational (or not). 

ii.  Probabilistic models deals with the uncertainties associated with fire growth 

processes. They are further classified as                                                                             
a. Network                                                                                                                                 
b. Statistical                                                                                                                                
c. Simulation  

 
3.b.a. NETWORK  MODELS 
 
i.  Network models are fire growth models in which the transition from one fire 

stage to another and the effectiveness of fire suppression systems, manual 
fire fighting, passive fire protection, and so on are governed by user-assigned 
probabilities that are based on historical data, engineering evaluations, or 
both. In some cases, these probabilities are single values, and in other mod-
els, the probabilities are time dependent. 

 
3.b.b. STATISTICAL  MODELS 
 
i.  Statistical models represent the probability of an occurrence as it is deter-

mined from historical data. A classic example of a statistical model is the oc-
currence of fire alarms. Fire alarms are random events that are, within cer-
tain constraints, uniform in nature. That is, a fire or fire alarm might occur at 
any time with equal probability. 

 
3.b.c. SIMULATION  MODELS 
 
i.  Simulation models may predict outcomes for a given set of conditions by us-
ing other physical, probabilistic, or deterministic models. In the latter case, 
simulation models regard fires as deterministic once the fire is fully defined. 
However, the inputs to the models are assumed to follow probabilistic mod-
els. 

 

5. FIRE MODELS 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1139 of 1348 

 

OCCUPANCY 

REQUIRMENTS 

Table 17.1: Guidelines for Risk Assessment 

4.  ZONE FIRE MODELS 
 
i.  Fire environment in a room is quite complex. Major insights into fire behavior 
have been achieved by a simple conceptual construct called zone modeling. In 
essence, a zone model assumes that the compartment may be idealized as con-
sisting of uniform conditions in single or multiple regions or zones. In a two-zone 
model, these regions are                                                                                                                     
a. An  upper region, filled with hot combustion gases                                                                       
b. A lower region, filled with cooler, more nearly ambient air.  

ii.  Each region or zone is idealized to have uniform temperatures and gas concentra-

tions. The plane dividing the two zones is the hot layer interface that may move 
vertically during fire. 

iii.  The two-zone model concept simplifies the room fire thermal environment to 

two temperatures and an interface height rather than a three-dimensional tem-
perature field. Major simplifications are realized both mathematically and com-
putationally. These simplifications have made many fire problems tractable and 
have allowed significant progress to be made. 

iv.  Zone models by definition will always be approximate. The key is whether the 

predictions are “close enough” to yield significant insight for the situation under 
study. Zone modeling yields useful insight into many fire problems. 

 
4.a.  ASET 
 
i.  ASET (Available Safe Egress Time) is a program for calculating the temperature 
and position of the hot smoke layer in a single room with closed doors and win-
dows. 

ii.  ASET can be used to determine the time to the onset of hazardous conditions for 

both people and property. The required program inputs are the heat loss frac-
tions, the height of the fuel above the floor, criteria for hazard and detection, the 
room ceiling height, the room floor area, a heat release rate, and a species gener-
ation rate of the fire (optional).  

iii.  The program outputs are the temperature, thickness, and (optional) species con-

centration of the hot smoke layer as a function of time and the time to hazard 
and detection.  

iv.  ASET can examine multiple cases in a single run. ASET-B is a compact version of 

ASET designed to run on personal computers. Species concentrations and time to 
hazard and detection calculated by ASET are not calculated in the compact ASET-
B version. 

 
 

5. FIRE MODELS 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1140 of 1348 

OCCUPANCY 

REQUIRMENTS 

Table 17.1: Guidelines for Risk Assessment 

5. FIRE MODELS 

 

 

 

4.b.  CFAST 
 
i 

CFAST (Consolidated Model of Fire Growth and Smoke Transport) is a multiroom 
fire model that predicts the conditions resulting from a user-specified fire within 
a structure.  

ii  The required program inputs are the geometrical data describing the rooms and 

connections, the thermophysical properties of the ceiling, walls, and floors, the 
fire as a rate of mass loss and the generation rates of the products of combus-
tion.  

iii  The program outputs are the temperature, species concentrations, and thickness 

of the hot upper layer and the cooler lower layer in each compartment. Also giv-
en are surface temperatures, heat transfer, and mass flow rates. 

iv  CFAST has very limited mechanical ventilation capabilities and can accommodate 

multiple fires, sprinklers, and detectors. FAST provides the data-editing and re-
porting tools for the CFAST model. 

 
4.c.  LAVENT 
 
i 

LAVENT (Link-Actuated VENT) is a two-zone model developed to simulate the 
environment and the response of sprinkler links in compartment fires with draft 
curtains and fusible-link-actuated ceiling vents. 

ii  The model used to calculate the heating of the fusible links includes the effects of 

the ceiling jet and the upper layer of hot gases beneath the ceiling. 

iii  The required program inputs are the geometrical data describing the compart-
ment, the thermophysical properties of the ceiling, the fire elevation, the time-
dependent energy release rate of the fire, the fire diameter or energy release 
rate per area of the fire, the ceiling vent area, the fusible-link response time in-
dex (RTI) and fuse temperature, the fusible-link positions along the ceiling, the 
link assignment to each ceiling vent, and the ambient temperature. A maximum 
of five ceiling vents and ten fusible links are permitted in the compartment.  

iv  The program outputs are the temperature, mass and height of the hot upper lay-
er, the temperature of each link, the ceiling jet temperature and velocity at each 
link, the radial temperature distribution along the interior surface of the ceiling, 
the radial distribution of the heat flux to the interior and exterior surfaces of the 
ceiling, the fuse time of each link, and the vent area that has been opened. 

 
 

 

Did You Know? 

A fire occurred in September 1, 2010 and spread to a neighbouring building in 

Mount Vernon, New York. The fire investigator presented Computer Models to jus-

tify that fire started from an electric fan. 

The New York court judge rejected the computer modeling, stating that defendant 

had not presented sufficient evidence that computer fire modeling was generally 

accepted as reliable in the fire investigation community. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1141 of 1348 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1142 of 1348 

 

OCCUPANCY 

REQUIRMENTS 

Table 17.1: Guidelines for Risk Assessment 

4.d.  CONTAM 
 
i.  CONTAM is a single-zone model originally designed to track the movement of 

ii. 

nonfire contaminants through a building.  
In includes extensive HVAC system model components and includes stack effect 
flows. Fire smoke sources can be modeled, though the temperatures in the build-
ing are set solely by the user, rather than being calculated as is done in most fire 
models.  

iii.  This modeling approach has been applied to the tallest buildings in the world to 
evaluate the potential for smoke movement and to design smoke management 
systems. Calculations are quite rapid, even for the largest buildings. 

 
4.e.  FISSIM 
 
i.  FSSIM is a single-zone model originally designed for fire hazard analysis of ships. 
It includes most of the features of the popular two-zone models but within a sin-
gle-zone fire environment description. 
It includes extensive HVAC system model components, stack effect, prediction of 
compartment temperatures, smoke and gas concentrations, as well as compart-
ment-to-compartment fire spread, detection, and suppression.  

ii. 

iii.  It has been applied to ships and buildings with several thousand compartments. 
iv.  Calculations are slower than CONTAM but still much faster than two-zone models 

and CFD models. 

 
5.  COMPUTATIONAL FLUID DYNAMICS (CFD) MODELS 
 
i.  Computational fluid dynamics (CFD) models avoid the simplifications inherent in 
zone models. The physical aspects of any fluid flow are governed by three funda-
mental principles: 1. Mass is conserved; 2. Newton’s second law *force = (mass) × 
(acceleration)+; and 3. Energy is conserved.  

ii.  These fundamental principles can be expressed as generalized mathematical 

equations in the form of integral or partial differential equations and are general-
ly referred to as the Navier-Stokes equations.  

iii.  CFD is the technique of replacing the integrals and partial derivatives with discre-

tized algebraic forms, which are solved to obtain numeric values at discrete 
points in time and/or space.  

iv.  Using an appropriate solving technique, the CFD model solves the fundamental 

equations of mass, momentum, and energy at each grid point in the computa-
tional domain that has been divided into a number of grid points that produce 
small elements.  
Imagine an enclosure filled with a three-dimensional grid of tiny cubes. A CFD 
model will calculate the physical conditions in each cube as a function of time. 

v. 

vi.  The CFD model program uses an iterative solver to calculate the physical changes 

in the cube at the current time step as a result of physical changes in the sur-
rounding cubes from the previous time step. Depending on the size of the cubes, 
this model permits the user to determine the conditions (e.g., temperature, ve-
locity, gas concentrations) at almost any point in the computational field. 

5. FIRE MODELS 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1143 of 1348 

 

OCCUPANCY 

REQUIRMENTS 

Table 17.1: Guidelines for Risk Assessment 

5.a.  FDS (Fire Dynamics Simulator) MODELS 
 
i.  FDS allows for “Direct Numerical Simulation” or “Large Eddy Simulations (LES)” of 

fire effects. 

ii.  The LES approach most readily lends itself to solving the types of fire problems 

typically found in fire engineering design and forensic applications. LES uses a low 
Mach number approximation for the Navier-Stokes equations and a formulation 
of the complex governing equations to provide a very efficient solution.  

iii.  Under the LES mode, the user inputs the parameters of the fire in terms of heat 

release rate and species generation.  

iv.  Although FDS includes algorithms for flame spread, burning rate, and suppres-
sion, these have not been developed and validated so as to allow their applica-
tion to problems in these areas.  

v.  FDS calculates the temperature, pressure, species concentrations and flow field 

in relation to the prescribed fire. FDS provides for calculating the activation of 
heat detectors and sprinklers. In addition, the sprinklers can dispense droplets, 
which yield evaporative cooling and prewetting.  

vi.  The model supports prediction of multiple sprinkler activations. FDS also has the 

built-in capability of predicting the response of smoke detectors. 

vii.  The major geometric limitation of FDS is its exclusive use of rectilinear computa-
tional meshes, which effectively limits the model to “stair stepped” approxima-
tions for curved or sloped geometries.  

viii. Although there are commercial CFD packages that allow better definition of real-
istic geometries, these are much less efficient and there has been limited valida-
tion of commercial CFD codes for use in fire applications.  

ix.  Heat transfer is treated as one-dimensional and is calculated by using thermally 

thin or thermally thick elements, but heat is not conducted through wall portions 
to other parts of the domain. The model also supports heat-activated vents that 
“open,” allowing flow through the vent.  

x.  Smokeview is the companion software that is designed to visualize the numerical 

predictions generated by FDS. 

 
5.b.  RANS (Reynolds Averaged Navier-Stokes) MODELS 
 
i.  There are many commercially available CFD models. These general-purpose CFD 
models are designed to solve a wide range of flow phenomena including steady 
and transient, laminar and turbulent and incompressible and compressible.  

ii.  Model features include heat transfer (convection, conduction, and radiation), 

mass transfer and chemical reaction (including combustion), porous media, scalar 
transport equations, discrete particle transport, multiple fluid streams, and multi-
phase flows.  

iii.  Commercial codes include graphical user interfaces (GUI) to aid the user in mesh 

generation, variable input, and postprocessing of results.  

iv.  These codes allow for body-fitted coordinates, structured and unstructured grids, 

as well as adaptive and moving grids.  

v.  Output displays of variables include perspective views, contour mapping, vector 

diagrams, particle tracks, and gradients. The most widely used commercially 
available and general-purpose CFD codes for the simulation of combustion and 
fire include STAR*CD, Fluent, and CFX. 

 
 

5. FIRE MODELS 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1144 of 1348 

Table 17.1: Guidelines for Risk Assessment 

OCCUPANCY 

REQUIRMENTS 

5. FIRE     

MODELS 

5.c.  ASCOS (Analysis of Smoke Control Systems) MODELS 
 
i.  ASCOS is a program for steady air flow analysis of smoke control systems. This pro-

 

 

6. EVENT TREE 

gram can analyze any smoke control system that produces pressure differences 
with the intent of limiting smoke movement in building fire situations.  

ii.  The program is also capable of modeling the stack effect created in taller buildings 

during extreme temperature conditions.  

iii.  The program input consists of the outside and building temperatures, a description 

of the building flow network and the flows produced by the ventilation or smoke 
control system.  

iv.  The output consists of the steady state pressures and flows throughout the build-

ing.  

i.  Event trees, as the name suggests, represent fires as a sequence of events. An 

event may correspond to a change in the size or character of the fire, a change in 
the status or performance of various active systems or passive features, or a 
change in the status or behaviour of occupants or first responders.  

ii.  An event tree is a visual representation of all the events that can occur in a system. 
As the number of events increases, the picture fans out like the branches of a tree.  

iii.  The goal of an event tree is to determine the probability of an event based on the 
outcomes of each event in the chronological sequence of events leading up to it. 

iv.  The event tree displays the sequences of events involving success and/or failure of 
the system components. By analysing all possible outcomes, one can determine the 
percentage of outcomes that lead to the desired result make a model as complete 
as possible, the tree must represent all possible events as accurately as possible.  

v.  The initiating event, which is generally a fire, is what starts the sequence of events 

detailed in the event tree. All subsequent events stem from the initiating event.  
vi.  As a simplistic example, an event tree can be constructed to analyse the possible 
outcomes of a fire. The system has two strategic components designed to handle 
this event: manual intervention by staff and an automatic suppression system. If 
the fire is too large to be controlled by staff, it will be mostly contained by the sup-
pression system. If the suppression system fails as well, the loss is unacceptable. 
vii.  Event trees show all possible event options and chance events with a branching 

structure. They proceed chronologically, left to right, showing events as they occur 
in time. All outcomes along with the values and probabilities associated with them 
can be shown directly on the tree.  

viii. There is very little ambiguity as to the possible outcomes and events the tree repre-
sents. Any node gives all possible outcomes resulting from the node and the events 
that follow. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1145 of 1348 

 

Table 17.1: Guidelines for Risk Assessment 

OCCUPANCY 

REQUIRMENTS 

7. FAULT TREE 

i.  Fault or success trees are organized to deliver a probability of failure or success, 

respectively, as the outcome measure. For this reason, such trees are most useful 
in estimating probabilities—such as the probability of ignition—for use in a larger 
model with a different format. 

ii.  The advantages of fault tree analysis (FTA) include, but are not limited to, the fol-

lowing:                                                                                                                                                        
a. Fault trees provide the logic of how fires start and develop in a graphic format 
that is easy to understand.                                                                                                                   
b. Fault trees show how different features, systems, and elements interact or act 
independently to affect fire ignition and development.                                                                   
c. It is easy to compute probabilities from a fault tree. 

iii.  The disadvantages of FTA include, but are not limited to, the following:                              

a. A fault tree explores only those faults and conditions that lead to a single speci-
fied event.                                                                                                                                   
b. It may be difficult to identify all contributing factors.                                                              
c. The fault tree can become very large 

8. RISK MATRIX 

i.  A risk matrix utilizes probability levels and severity categories to represent the 
axis of a two-dimensional risk matrix. The matrix indicates that improbable haz-
ards with negligible consequences represent a low risk and that frequently occur-
ring hazards with greater consequences represent high-risk levels. 

ii.  The probability levels are as mentioned in Table 17.1.b. 
iii.  The severity categories are mentioned in Table 17.1.c. 

Table 17.1.b.: Probability Levels 

PROBABILITY 

DEFINITION 

1. FREQUENT 

2. PROBABLE 

i. 

Likely to occur frequently, experienced, (p>0.1) 

i.  Will occur several times during system life, (p>0.001) 

3. OCCASIONAL 

i.  Unlikely to occur in a given system operation, (p>10–6) 

4. REMOTE 

i.  So improbable, may be assumed this hazard will not be experienced, (p<10–6) 

5. IMPROBABLE 

i.  Probability of occurrence not distinguishable from zero, (p ~ 0.001) 

SEVERITY 

IMPACT 

Table 17.1.c.: Severity Categories 

1. NEGLIGIBLE 

2. MARGINAL 

3. CRITICAL 

4. CATASTROPHIC 

 

i.  The impact of loss will be so minor that it would have no discernible effect on 

the facility, its operations, or the environment  

i.  The loss will have impact on the facility, which may have to suspend some oper-
ations briefly. Some monetary investments may be necessary to restore the fa-
cility to full operations. Minor personal injury may be involved. The fire could 
cause localized environmental damage.  

i.  The loss will have a high impact on the facility, which may have to suspend oper-
ations. Significant monetary investments may be necessary to restore to full op-
erations. Personal injury and possibly deaths may be involved. The fire could 
cause significant reversible environmental damage. 

i.  The fire will produce death or multiple deaths or injuries, or the impact on oper-
ations will be disastrous, resulting in long-term or permanent closing. The facili-
ty would cease to operate immediately after the fire occurred. The fire could 
cause significant irreversible environmental damage. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1146 of 1348 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1147 of 1348 

 

Table 17.1: Guidelines for Risk Assessment 

OCCUPANCY 

REQUIRMENTS 

9. FIRE  AND         

EXPLOSION INDEX 

(F&EI) SYSTEM 

MATERIAL      

FACTOR (MF) 

1.  MATERIAL FACTOR (MF) 
 
i.  The MF is the measure of the intrinsic potential energy released by the com-

bustion, explosion or chemical reaction of the substances restrained in the 
equipment under study. The MF is calculated from the Nf and Nr. Those pa-
rameters are NFPA rating expressing the flammability and reactivity of the 
substance respectively.  

FOR PROCESS  AND 

STORAGE HAZARD             

ii.  The flammability, or in generally, the reactivity of substances rise with the 
temperature. If the process condition are different from the ambient tem-
perature, a corrective factor must be adopted defined as “Temperature Ad-
justment of Material Factor”. An example of Material factor is shown in     
Table 17.1.d. 

EVALUATION 

 
2.  GENERAL HAZARDS (GH) 
 
i.  General process Hazards are factors that play a primary role in determining 

the magnitude of a loss incident.  The factors are,                                                      
a. Chemical Processes                                                                                                    
b. Storage, Handling, Transfer and Manufacturing                                                 
c. Confinement                                                                                                               
d. Access                                                                                                                          
e. Drainage                                                                                                                       
f. Total General Hazards Factor are investigated as contributing hazards. 

 
3.  SPECIFIC  HAZARDS (SH) 
 
i.  The specific hazards are                                                                                                
a. Quantities of Materials Involved                                                                             
b. Pressure Conditions                                                                                                    
c. Toxic Materials Involved                                                                                           
d. Explosion Potential/ Flammable Range                                                                  
e. Total Specific Hazards Factor that indicate existence of specific conditions 
as a major contributing factor in fire and explosion incidents are investigat-
ed. 

 
4.  FIRE AND EXPLOSION INDEX (F&EI) 
 
i.  The F&EI calculation is calculated by giving credit for both general and spe-

cific hazards to the materials involved.  The formula used is                       
F&EI = MF  x  (1 + GH)  x (1 + SH),                                                             
Where MF—Material Factor, GH– General Hazard, SH– Specific Hazard 

ii.  The resulting F&EI values are ranked into four categories.                                 

a. 1-45 Light Hazard.                                                                                                       
b. 46-60 Moderate Hazard.                                                                                             
c. 61-95 High Hazard.                                                                                                      
d. 96-above Severe Hazard 

Flammability  Reactivity Nr=0  Nr=1 

Nr=2 

Nr=3 

Nr=4 

Table 17.1.d.: Material Factor (MF) Example 

Nf = 0 

Nf = 1 

Nf = 2 

Nf = 3 

Nf = 4 
 

1 

4 

10 

16 

21 

14 

14 

14 

16 

21 

24 

24 

24 

24 

24 

29 

29 

29 

29 

29 

40 

40 

40 

40 

40 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1148 of 1348 

 

Table 17.1: Guidelines for Risk Assessment 

OCCUPANCY 

REQUIRMENTS 

9. FIRE  AND         

EXPLOSION INDEX 

(F&EI) SYSTEM 

MATERIAL      

FACTOR (MF) 

5.  TOXICITY NUMBER (Th) 
 
i.  The toxicity number (Th) is derived from the NFPA health factor Nh (NFPA 
704, 325M or 49).  Nh is an integer number ranging from 0 to 4.  The five 
degrees of hazards are related to the protective equipment normally availa-
ble to fire fighters. The example of Toxicity numbers are shown in              
Table 17.1.e. 

EVALUATION 

FOR PROCESS  AND 

STORAGE HAZARD             

 
6.  PENALTY FACTOR (Ts) 
 
i.  The Penalty Factor (Ts) is the second toxicity parameter used to determine 

the TI.  The Ts value is derived from the ‘Threshold Limit Values (TLV)’. 

ii.  The TLV-values are drawn up by the American Conference of Governmental 

Industrial Hygienists.   

iii.  TLV represents a time weighted average (TWA) air concentration to which 
workers can be exposed during a normal working week without ill effects.  
TLV is often indicated as a TWA-value, both are the same. 

iv.  The penalty factor is determined from the Table 17.1.f. 
 
7.  TOXICITY INDEX 
 
i.  The Toxicity Index is then calculated from Th and Ts plus the hazard factors 
of fire & Explosion Index (F&EI). The TI is found from the following formula  

 
 
       Where MF—Material Factor, GH– General Hazard, SH– Specific Hazard 
i.  The resulting TI values are ranked into three categories.                                     
a. 1-5 Light                                                                                                                    
b. 6-9 Moderate                                                                                                           
c. 10-Above High                                                                                                        

Table 17.1.e.: Material Factor (MF) Example 

Nh 

0 

1 

2 

3 

4 

Th 
0 

50 

125 

250 

325 

Table 17.1.f.: Material Factor (MF) Example 

Threshold Limit Values (TLV) 

< 5 

5-50 

> 50 

Penalty Factor (Ts) 
0 

50 

125 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1149 of 1348 

2.4.  Documentation of Risk Assessment Studies 

2.4.1. 

Risk Assessment Studies and reports shall be documented as per Table 17.2. 

Table 17.2: Risk Assessment Reports and Documentation 

ITEMS 

REQUIRMENTS 

REPORT 

1.  RISK                

ASSESSMENT       

1.  GENERAL 
 
i.  The documentation shall include the fire protection engineering brief, the analy-

sis documentation and operation and maintenance manual. 

ii.  The purpose of the fire risk assessment concept report shall facilitate agreement 

on the approach that is proposed for the risk assessment. 

iii.  There might be multiple parties involved in a risk analysis, with each party bring-

ing a different perspective to the risk analysis. Possible stakeholders in the risk 
analysis include the risk analyst, building or facility owners and managers, Civil 
Defence, tenants, building operators or maintainers, emergency responders, in-
surance providers, and members of a construction team. 

iv.  The Fire Risk Assessment shall only be submitted by Civil Defence approved 

House of Expertise for Civil Defence approval. 

v.  Where consultants, experienced field experts, non-registered parties prepare 

Risk Assessment reports, Civil Defence approved House of Expertise shall be per-
mitted to submit such reports on their behalf. 

 
2.  STAKE HOLDERS 
 
i.  The fire risk assessment concept report should include a listing of all of the stake-

holders involved in the preparation of the risk assessment and their qualifica-
tions, such as educational background, past experience in FRA, and registration 
license copy from Civil Defence as “House of Expertise”. 

 
3.  PROJECT SCOPE 
 
i.  Project scope shall be clearly indicated. The project scope is an identification of 

the limits of the risk analysis and the purpose for conducting the risk analysis. The 
limits might include a building, part of a building, individual components or piec-
es of equipment, or processes. The purpose might be to identify the level of risk 
present in an existing building or facility, to identify methods of lowering the risk 
in an existing building or facility, or to identify methods of providing a level of risk 
deemed acceptable in a new or renovated building or facility. 

 
4.  FIRE SAFETY GOALS 
 
i.  Fire safety goals should be clearly stated. The goals of the FRA may be associated 

with the risk to life (occupants or fire fighters), the risk to property, the risk to 
operations, or the risk to the environment. 

ii.  Goals are typically qualitative and should be in a form that will be easily under-

stood by laypeople. 

 
5.  HAZARDS 
 
i.  A risk assessment is based on a set of hazards that might occur. The hazards that 

are contemplated should be included in the concept report. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1150 of 1348 

 

Table 17.2: Risk Assessment Reports and Documentation 

ITEMS 

REQUIRMENTS 

1.  RISK                

 
6.  ACCEPTANCE CRITERIA 
ASSESSMENT       
 
i.  The acceptance criteria proposed to be used to judge the acceptability of the risk 

REPORT 

should be documented. 

ii.  Documentation of the assumptions made in deriving the required performance 
ensures that future modifications can be captured. These modifications, which 
could inadvertently change the key elements or features critical to the intended 
performance of the building and its systems, such as changes in specified mainte-
nance procedures, have to be accounted for in order to maintain the level of 
safety before the implementation of the detrimental modifications. 

iii.  Results may be either relative (e.g., compared to a baseline or comparing alterna-
tive options) or absolute (e.g., deaths per year). Within this context, they may be 
qualitative or quantitative. 

iv.  The acceptance criteria may be in the form of a quantitative risk value, a compar-

ative value, or other values as agreed to by the stakeholders and the Civil De-
fence. The form of the acceptance criteria should be dependent on the risk prob-
lem and should influence the selection of appropriate FRA methods. 

v.  Acceptance criteria should be established during preplanning. 
vi.  Acceptance criteria may be based on one of the following:                                           
a. Prescriptive regulations                                                                                                     
b. Performance regulations                                                                                                   
c. Other agreed-to criteria d. Standards and guides. 

 
7.  SCENARIOS 
 
i.  All scenarios or scenario clusters that are proposed to be used in the analysis 

should be documented. Where like scenarios are clustered, the basis for cluster-
ing should also be included in the documentation.  

ii.  The documentation should state why the scenarios or scenario clusters used are 
representative of all scenarios to which the building or facility could be exposed.  
iii.  The types of scenarios that are not considered because they either are unrealisti-

cally severe or sufficiently unlikely should be documented with cause for exclu-
sion. 

 
8.  METHOD OF RISK ANALYSIS 
 
i.  The method that is proposed to be used to conduct the risk analysis should be 

documented. The documentation should address why the method is appropriate 
for the fire risk analysis 

 
9.  DATA COURCES 
 
i.  Data, reference to the sources of the data, and assumptions with justification 

should be provided. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1151 of 1348 

 

Table 17.2: Risk Assessment Reports and Documentation 

ITEMS 

REQUIRMENTS 

 
1.  QUALITATIVE METHODS 
 
1.a.  RESULTS 
 
i.  The results of a qualitative method will be qualitative, such as tabulations of out-

comes or relative likelihoods and consequences of fire scenarios and how they 
could be affected by protection options. Results should be provided for conse-
quence and likelihood of one or more scenarios. 

 
1.b.  LIMITATIONS 
 
i.  The limitations of the fire risk analysis should be provided. A limitation of this 

type of method would be that the results are only suitable for rankings of risks or 
comparisons of risks. In many cases qualitative methods do not address total risk, 
which would also be a limitation. 

 
1.c.  CONCLUSIONS 
 
i.  The results of the FRA, including a comparison to the pass/fail threshold if appli-
cable, should be summarized. A description should be provided of the degree to 
which the purpose and objectives have been met along with information on the 
appropriateness and completeness of the results for the intended purpose. 

 
1.d.  REFERENCES 
 
i.  The sources of the input data and how the input data are appropriate for the FRA 
should be identified. Examples of references include drawings, reports, manuals, 
publications, codes, and standards. The revision number or the publication date 
should be provided, if available. 

 
 
2.  SEMIQUALITATIVE LIKLIHOOD METHODS 
 
2.a.  RESULTS 
 
i.  Since semiquantitative likelihood models calculate the likelihood of a fire scenar-
io based on qualitatively defined consequence, the results should provide a prob-
ability of a type of scenario occurring within a defined period of time. 

 
2.b.  LIMITATIONS 
 
i.  The limitations of the fire risk analysis should be provided. A limitation of this 

type of method would be that it provides a numerical estimate of probability of a 
scenario occurring, but only a qualitative estimate of the consequences of a sce-
nario occurring. Semiquantitative likelihood models methods might not address 
total risk, which would also be a limitation. 

 
2.c.  CONCLUSIONS 
 
i.  The results of the FRA, including a comparison to the pass/fail threshold if appli-
cable, should be summarized. A description should be provided of the degree to 
which the purpose and objectives have been met along with information on the 
appropriateness and completeness of the results for the intended purpose . 

2.  ANALYSIS OF 

METHODS 

USED 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1152 of 1348 

 

Table 17.2: Risk Assessment Reports and Documentation 

ITEMS 

REQUIRMENTS 

2.  ANALYSIS OF 

METHODS 

USED 

 
2.d.  REFERENCES 
 
i.  The sources of the input data and how the input data are appropriate for the FRA 
should be identified. Examples of references include drawings, reports, manuals, 
publications, codes, and standards. The revision number or the publication date 
should be provided, if available. 

 
 
3.  SEMIQUANTITATIVE CONSEQUENCE METHODS 
 
3.a.  RESULTS 
 
i.  Semiquantitative consequence models provide a qualitative estimate of the prob-
ability of a scenario occurring and a quantitative prediction of the consequences. 
The most common type would be the calculation results of a fire model coupled 
with an estimate of the probability of the event occurring. 

 
3.b.  UNCERTAINTY ANALYSIS 
 
i.  Possible sources of uncertainty in the predictions of consequences, and how they 

were addressed, should be identified in the documentation. 

 
3.c.  SOFTWARE AND MODEL EVALUATION 
 
i.  The documentation should address why the models  and software used are ap-

propriate for the situation modeled. 

 
3.d.  LIMITATIONS 
 
i.  The limitations of the fire risk analysis should be provided. A limitation of this 
type of method would be that it provides a quantitative estimate of the conse-
quences of a scenario, but the probability of the scenario is only estimated quali-
tatively. Semiquantitative consequence models methods do not address total 
risk, which would also be a limitation. 

 
3.e.  CONCLUSIONS 
 
i.  The results of the FRA, including a comparison to the pass/fail threshold if appli-
cable, should be summarized. A description should be provided of the degree to 
which the purpose and objectives have been met along with information on the 
appropriateness and completeness of the results for the intended purpose . 

 
3.f.  REFERNCES 
 
i.  The sources of the input data and how the input data are appropriate for the FRA 
should be identified. Examples of references include drawings, reports, manuals, 
publications, codes, and standards. The revision number or the publication date 
should be provided, if available . 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1153 of 1348 

 

Table 17.2: Risk Assessment Reports and Documentation 

ITEMS 

REQUIRMENTS 

2.  ANALYSIS OF 

METHODS 

USED 

 
4.  QUANTITATIVE METHODS 
 
4.a.  RESULTS OF FREQUENCY OR PROBABILITY ANALYSIS 
 
i.  The documentation should include the results of the frequency and/or probabil-
ity analysis. For each scenario or cluster of scenarios that are identified, the asso-
ciated probabilities or frequencies should be documented. If probabilities are 
used, the time frame associated with the probability should be identified. 

 
4.b.  RESULTS OF CONSEQUENCE ANALYSIS 
 
i.  The results of the consequence analysis for each scenario or scenario cluster 

should be documented. If scenario clusters are used, the documentation should 
address how the consequence was determined to be representative for the sce-
nario cluster. 

 
4.c.  CALCULATED RISK 
 
i.  The calculated risk should be documented. This calculated risk should be the 

summation of the probabilities/frequencies and consequences for each scenario 
or scenario cluster. 

ii.  The document should also address why the risk analyst believes that the scenari-

os used are representative of the spectrum of scenarios that could occur. 

 
4.d.  UNCERTAINTY ALANLYSIS 
 
i.  Possible sources of uncertainty in the predictions of probabilities, frequencies, 
and consequences, and how they were addressed, should be identified in the 
documentation . 

 
4.e.  SOFTWARE AND MODEL EVALUATION 
 
i.  The documentation should address why the models used are appropriate for the 

situation modeled. 

 
4.f.  LIMITATIONS 
 
i.  Any limitations of the analysis should be addressed. Limitations might arise from 

the models used in the analysis or from the scope of the analysis. 

 
4.g.  CONCLUSIONS 
 
i.  The results of the FRA, including a comparison to the pass/fail threshold if appli-
cable, should be summarized. A description should be provided of the degree to 
which the purpose and objectives have been met along with information on the 
appropriateness and completeness of the results for the intended purpose. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1154 of 1348 

 

Table 17.2: Risk Assessment Reports and Documentation 

ITEMS 

REQUIRMENTS 

5.  COST BENEFIT FRA METHODS 
 
5.a.  RESULTS OF FREQUENCY OR PROBABILITY ANALYSIS 
 
i.  The documentation should include the results of the frequency and/or probabil-
ity analysis. For each scenario or cluster of scenarios that are identified, the asso-
ciated probabilities or frequencies should be documented. If probabilities are 
used, the time frame associated with the probability should be identified. 

 
5.b.  RESULTS OF CONSEQUENCE ANALYSIS 
 
i.  The results of the consequence analysis for each scenario or scenario cluster 

should be documented. If scenario clusters are used, the documentation should 
address how the consequence was determined to be representative for the sce-
nario cluster. 

 
5.c.  RESULTS OF COST ANALYSIS 
 
i.  The results of the cost analysis should be documented. The documentation 

should include information as to how the costs were determined for the conse-
quences identified and for any protection measures that were contemplated. 

 
5.d.  CALCULATED RISK 
 
i.  The calculated risk should be documented. This calculated risk should be the 

summation of the probabilities/frequencies and consequences for each scenario 
or scenario cluster. The documentation should also address why the risk analyst 
believes that the scenarios or scenario clusters used are representative of the 
spectrum of scenarios that could occur. 

 
5.e.  UNCERTAINTY ALANLYSIS 
 
i.  Possible sources of uncertainty in the predictions of probabilities, frequencies, 
consequences and costs, and how they were addressed, should be identified in 
the documentation. 

 
5.f.  SOFTWARE AND MODEL EVALUATION 
 
i.  The documentation should address why the models used are appropriate for the 

situation modeled. 

 
5.g.  LIMITATIONS 
 
i.  Any limitations of the analysis should be addressed. Limitations might arise from 

the models used in the analysis or from the scope of the analysis. 

 
5.h.  CONCLUSIONS 
 
i.  The results of the FRA, including a comparison to the pass/fail threshold if appli-
cable, should be summarized. A description should be provided of the degree to 
which the purpose and objectives have been met along with information on the 
appropriateness and completeness of the results for the intended purpose. 

2.  ANALYSIS OF 

METHODS 

USED 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1155 of 1348 

2.5.  Operation and Maintenance Manual 

2.5.1. 

 
 2.5.2. 
 

The operation and Maintenance manual shall be handed over to the owner, opera-
tor, tenant or the stakeholder responsible for the facility management. The opera-
tions and maintenance manual is to identify conditions that must be maintained 
for decisions made during the fire risk assessment to remain valid. These condi-
tions might include the limitations on use or inspection, testing, and maintenance 
requirements. 

The operation and maintenance shall be documented as per Table 17.3. 

Table 17.3: Risk Assessment Reports and Documentation 

OCCUPANCY 

REQUIRMENTS 

1.  OPERATION 

AND     

MAINTENANCE 

MANUAL 

 
1.  LISTING OF LIMITATIONS AND ASSUMPTIONS MADE 
 
i. 

In the interest of time, money, and/or simplicity, the engineering methods and 
models used to simulate system performance or to evaluate the fire risk are 
usually simplified. These simplifications carry limitations and assumptions, 
which should be explicitly listed. 

ii.  Administrative controls and programs to protect these limitations and as-

sumptions should be addressed and described. 

iii.  The following topics should be reviewed to ensure that the operation of the 
facility does not inadvertently violate the limitations and assumptions of the 
FRA during normal and emergency situations.                                                             
a. Engineering specifications, procurement documentation, work priorities, 
equipment replacement practices, rigorousness of equivalency evaluations, 
process monitoring instrument accuracies, electrical fault design practices, fuse 
replacement programs, and so forth.                                                                             
b. Operating procedures (both normal and emergency), communications sys-
tem availability, local response for emergency, emergency plans, and respond-
ent training.                                                                                                                         
c. Labeling and storage practices, inventory control, packing/unpacking practic-
es, material control, and vehicle use and control.                                                        
d.  Housekeeping, hot work control, and combustible and flammable material 
control practices.                                                                                                                
e. Training programs.                                                                                                         
f. System design, reliability, maintenance, testing, and configuration control. 

 
2.  CHANGE IN MANAGEMENT PROGRAM AND ORGANIZATION EVOLUTION 
 
i.  Organizations and processes evolve continually. The elements of change in-

clude the following.                                                                                                         
a. Knowledge changes.                                                                                                   
b. Product obsolescence                                                                                                  
c. Labor force mix and quality changes.                                                                        
d. Increasing internationalization, which changes the character and the quality 
of products.                                                                                                                         
e. Formal organization changes, which produce functional efficiency changes 
and realign departmental interfaces.                                                                              
f. Jurisdictional criteria. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1156 of 1348 

 

Table 17.3: Risk Assessment Reports and Documentation 

OCCUPANCY 

REQUIRMENTS 

1.  OPERATION 

AND     

MAINTENANCE 

MANUAL 

 
3.  VALIDITY OF FRA 
 
i.  The FRA is usually valid only under a limited set of conditions, depending on 
the inputs used. Any changes in factors such as building construction, geome-
try, outfitting and processes could result in the FRA no longer being valid.  

ii.  Therefore, documentation should be provided on the set of conditions under 

which the FRA is considered to be valid and what types of changes in condi-
tions would require a new FRA.  

iii.  Where it is intended to ensure that a risk is acceptable, methods of monitoring 

for change, such as periodic inspection, should be documented in an opera-
tions and maintenance manual or equivalent document. 

 
4.  VIOLATION OF FRA 
 
i. 

Implementation of the following controls should be considered to avoid chang-
ing the established risk unknowingly. 

ii.  Educate the building owner and operator to identify when the FRA is affected 

and to understand change impacts. 

iii.  Footnote the procedures and programs to reinforce the source of constraint or 

element of basis that allows for the applicable process steps to be changed. 
iv.  Formalize the change process to account for pertinent departments being in-
cluded in evaluation of the impact to the facility/program, including risk (i.e., 
getting the right people involved). 

v.  Pilot programs used prior to change must be broader based in evaluating the 

total impacts to the modifications being made. 

vi.  Audit the processes and programs to ensure continued support of elements 

such as the FRA. 

vii. Because the FRA cannot presume to address all the possible changes, it is in-
cumbent on the analyst to incorporate the assumptions, limitations, and con-
clusions into the ongoing process procedures and programs to ensure ade-
quate understanding of the key attributes affected. 

 
5.  INSPECTION 
 
i. 

Inspection, testing, and maintenance requirements on which the assessment is 
based need to be documented. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1157 of 1348Chapter 18 
RESPONSIBILITIES OF 
STAKEHOLDERS 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1158 of 1348In this Chapter: 

Î  Responsibilities of building owners, developers, consultants, house of expertise 

and contractors. 

Î  Responsibilities of material manufacturers, agents, suppliers, material testing 

laboratories and conformity certification bodies. 

Î  Responsibilities of assembly, educational, healthcare, office, detention and mall 

management. 

Intent of the Chapter: 

•  To familiarize the stakeholders of their responsibilities towards 

fire and life safety. 

•  To  create  awareness  of  the  mandatory  duties  of  individual 
stakeholders  in  their  individual  occupancies  and  their  role  in 
executing  the  regulations  of  Civil  Defence  in  creating  fire  safe 
buildings  and  cities. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1159 of 1348 

In this Chapter : 

  Responsibilities of building Owners, 

Developers. Consultants, House of 
Expertise and Contractors. 

  Responsibilities of Material 

Manufacturers, Agents, Suppliers, 
Material Testing Laboratories and 
Conformity Certification Bodies 

  Responsibilities of Assembly, 

Educational, Healthcare, Office, 
Detention and Mall Management. 

1. Definitions 

1.1. General 

 

Intent of the Chapter 

  To familiarize the stake holders of their 

responsibilities towards Fire and Life 
Safety. 

  To create awareness of the mandatory 

duties of individual stake holders in their 
individual occupancies and their role in 
executing the regulations of Civil Defence 
in creating a fire safe buildings and cities. 

It is a mandatory requirement by Civil Defence. 

1.1.1.  Shall  
 
 
1.1.2.  Should 
 
 
1.1.3.  Listed 
 
 
1.1.4.  Gallon. U.S. Standard and Kilogram  
 

It is a suggested requirement recommended by Civil Defence but not mandatory. 

Approved and registered by individual Emirates’ Civil Defence material department. 

1 U.S. gal = 3.785 L., 1 Kg = 1.8 Liter, Approx. (Units used in this chapter are either Kil-
ograms or US Gallons. Conversion of Liter to Kg without  knowing specific density, 
Liter conversion to Kg is approximate for the purpose of LPG cylinders quantities.) 

 
1.1.5.  Kilogram  
 

1 Kg = 2.20.lb (Pounds) 

 

1.1.6.  Temporary  
 

Wherever temporary arrangement arises with respect to fire and life safety, it is for 
the duration of 180 days (approximately 6 months) 

Four times a Year (Every 3 months) 

 
1.1.7.  Biannually or Semiannually 
 
Twice a Year (Every six months)  
 
1.1.8.  Quarterly   
 
 
1.1.9.  Annually    
 
 
1.1.10. Fortnight    
 
 

Once every year 

Fourteen nights and fourteen days. Every 2 weeks. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1160 of 1348 

 

1.2. Responsibilities of Stakeholders 

 
1.2.1. Stakeholder   
 

In the context of this chapter, stakeholder is a collective term involving investor, own-
er, participating parties, service providers (architects, consulting engineers, installa-
tion contractors, inspection agencies, maintenance contractors etc.), profit makers, 
interested parties, third parties and caretakers involved in the project development, 
design, construction, installation, inspection and maintenance. 

 
1.2.2. Responsibilities/ Responsible 
 

The requirement of being liable to fulfill duties and answerable to fulfill accountabil-
ity. 

 
1.2.3. Owner  
 

A person who is the proprietor and possesses the legal authority from government to 
own the particular land, property, assets, structure, businesses or material. 

 
1.2.4. Owner’s representative  
 

A qualified and competent person or organization appointed or designated by the 
owner to perform owner’s duties and responsibilities on owner’s behalf. Owner is 
directly responsible for Owner’s representative’s conduct. 

 
1.2.5. Developer (Property Developer)   
 

A person or the organization who makes investments to purchase urban or suburban 
land and real estate, develops it into habitable spaces, especially by subdividing the 
land into building sites to sell or/and constructing buildings on those sites to sell. 

 
 
1.2.6. Infrastructure (Urban and Suburban)  
 

Fundamental features of an urban or suburban habitable spaces which provides for 
basic needs of modern living such as Roads to drive to places, electricity supply and  
power distribution for lighting, water supply and distribution, Fuel Supply and distri-
bution for cooking, communication network, drainage network and public transporta-
tion facilities such as rail and bus networks. 

 
 

However, Civil Defence’ concern and approval scope with infrastructure is limited to 
Road Network, cooking Fuel supply and distribution, and urban fire fighting provision 
such as Public Yard Fire Hydrants. 

 
1.2.7. Consultant (Lead/Main Consultant)  
 

A person or the organization who is a professional advisor, expert, specialist who 
offers his expertise in counseling, planning, designing, constructing and commission-
ing buildings, structures and infrastructure for a fee. 

 

 

 
 

In context to Civil Defence, “Consultant” is a professional , approved by both Munici-
pality and individual Emirates’ Civil Defence, authorized and “responsible” to design, 
including Fire and Life Safety Drawings and execute project construction work upon 
obtaining relevant formal approval and permit under his “responsibility”, from munic-
ipality and Civil Defence. 

However, Main consultant is not authorized to prepare Fire and Life Safety reports 
and risk assessments when initiated by Civil Defence. It is House of Expertise’ scope. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1161 of 13481.2. Responsibilities of Stakeholders 

 
1.2.8.  House of Expertise (Fire Consultant)  
 

The organization registered and approved by Civil Defence, performs as a third par-
ty expertise in Fire and Life Safety aspects of the project for a fee. 

 
 

 
 

When hired by the owner or Main Consultant, House of Expertise is “responsible” to 
review design, prepare Fire and Life Safety Drawings, prepare Fire and Life Safety 
reports, risk assessments and evaluations to be submitted to Civil Defence under 
the main consultant’s umbrella and applications. 

House of Expertise can also conduct inspections when hired by owner, consultants 
or contractors. However, House of expertise is not authorized to create applications 
directly with Civil Defence to take project approvals. Creating applications with Civil 
Defence is main consultant’s scope. 

 
1.2.9.  Contractor  
 

The organization registered and approved by individual Emirates’ Civil Defence, exe-
cutes specific scope of work of the project relevant to Fire and Life Safety aspect of 
the project, upon a contractual agreement with main consultant for a fee. 

 
 

 
 

In context to Civil Defence, contractors are limited to Fire and Life Safety aspects of 
the project such as Fire Detection and Alarm contractors, Emergency Lighting con-
tractor, Fire fighting Contractors, Smoke control System contractors, Façade con-
tractors, Fire door contractors, Fire stopping contractors, LPG/Natural gas contrac-
tors etc. 

Contractors out of Fire and Life Safety aspect of the project, such as Civil Contrac-
tor, MEP Contractor, HVAC Contractor and Lighting contractor etc. are under the 
governance of Municipality. 

 
1.2.10.  Fit-out Contractor (Décor Company)  
 

The organization registered by individual Emirates’ Civil Defence, executes interior 
décor and fit-out work, including Fire and Life Safety aspect of the space, upon a 
contractual agreement with owner or main consultant or tenant for a fee. 

 
 

 
 

In context to Civil Defence, “Décor Company” is a professional interior finish con-
tractor, authorized and “responsible” to design and execute fit-out work upon ob-
taining relevant formal approval and permit under his “responsibility”, from munici-
pality and Civil Defence. 

However, Décor company is not authorized to prepare Fire and Life Safety reports 
and risk assessments when initiated by Civil Defence. It is House of Expertise’ scope. 

 
1.2.11.  Contract  
 

Contract is the mutual agreement between two parties, where one party is paid by 
the other to execute certain task. The “contract” when legally bound and valid, is a 
declaration by both parties that they will adhere to terms and conditions, including 
the requirements of UAE Fire and Life Safety Code of Practice, mentioned in the 
contract document. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1162 of 13481.2. Responsibilities of Stakeholders 

 
1.2.12.  Manufacturer   
 

A company which is registered and listed by Civil Defence, manufactures with ma-
chinery, technology and manpower, the products, goods, items which when in-
stalled, readily serve as Fire and Life Safety products.  

 
 

 
 

Manufacturers of parts, components, ingredients, portions or sections which re-
quire assembling process to become whole products are not recognized or regis-
tered or listed by Civil Defence. 

Obtaining 100% parts and components from other manufacturers and assembling 
those parts to create an end product is not manufacturing and such activities are 
not registered by Civil Defence under manufacturers.  

 
1.2.13.  Agent  
 

An establishment listed and approved by individual Emirates’ Civil Defence, to sell, 
install and maintain fire and life safety devices, equipment and materials, along with 
its accessories and fit outs, under commercial agency duly attested and listed in the 
UAE. 

 
1.2.14.  Supplier or Distributor 
 

An establishment listed and approved by individual Emirates’ Civil Defence, to sell 
fire and life safety devices, equipment and materials, along with its accessories and 
fit outs, under distribution agreement duly attested by an agent listed by the Civil 
Defence. 

 
1.2.15.  Testing Laboratory   
 

An accredited body or organization which performs tests and inspection of fire and 
life safety systems, devices, equipment and materials, listed by Civil Defence ap-
proved conformity certification bodies. 

 
 

 
 

Test laboratory registration and listing with Civil Defence is limited to basically con-
ducting tests “responsibly”, relevant to fire performance of materials and products 
such as ‘reaction to fire tests’. ’propagation of fire tests’ and ‘fire resistance tests’ 
where products and materials are tested, evaluated  and documented (Test Report) 
for their ‘reaction’ , ‘propagation’ or ’resistance’ when subjected to certain fire con-
ditions as per particular test standard. 

Other material and product tests such as environmental protection tests, stress 
test, composition tests etc. are not validated by Civil Defence. 

 
1.2.16.  Conformity Certification Or Conformity Assessment Body  
 

An accredited body which awards international safety certificates and is responsible 
for verifying conformity , monitor and audit the quality and efficiency of fire and life 
safety systems, devices, equipment and materials tested by Civil Defence approved 
Testing laboratories. 

 
 

Where accreditation scope permits, conformity assessment body can also create a 
scope of application, related to a test or series of tests, based on recognized indus-
try assessment rules. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1163 of 13481.2. Responsibilities of Stakeholders 

 
1.2.17.  Cross Listing   
 

Cross Listing refers to the certificate or conformity issued by the certification bodies 
to the primary manufacturer, where a material, product or system is manufactured 
in a certain primary factory at a certain primary location as a certain primary brand. 
And same certificate or conformity credentials are allowed and permitted to be 
used by a secondary manufacturer, in a secondary factory, at a secondary location, 
as a primary brand, claiming to abide by the quality, prerequisites, standards in an 
exact manner that were applicable to the primary manufacturer. 

 
1.2.18.  Multiple Listing   
 

 

Multiple Listing refers to the certificate or conformity issued by the certification 
bodies to the primary manufacturer, where a material, product or system is manu-
factured in a certain primary factory at a certain primary location as a certain prima-
ry brand.  
And same certificate or conformity credentials are allowed and permitted to be 
used by another non-manufacturer as a secondary brand, claiming to abide by the 
quality, prerequisites, standards in an exact manner that were applicable to the pri-
mary manufacturer and primary brand. 

 
1.2.19.  Facility Management Company  
 

A Civil Defence approved and registered company with manpower, hired by the 
owner, performs house keeping, security, cleaning, maintaining, repairing, replacing 
activities and in general functions as care taker of the property. 

 
 

During emergencies, facility management personnel is usually the first responder. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1164 of 1348 

2.  Responsibilities of Stakeholders 

 

2.1. Intention 

2.1.1.  Civil Defence’ intended Fire and Life Safety's success in the cities depends on a col-

lective effort by all the stakeholders involved. 

 
2.1.2.  This chapter provides minimum guidelines to all the stakeholders, of their role and 

commitment in achieving a Fire Safe environment in UAE. 

 

2.2. Basic Commitment  

2.2.1.  Success of Fire and Life Safety is in Prevention. Prevention of Fire through awareness 

and commitment of every individual in everyday life will ensure fire safe cities. 

 
2.2.2.  Owners are responsible for fire safety from the design stage. They should be actively 

involved in the planning stage to ensure that the end result of their project is in full 
compliance with Civil Defence regulations and provide a fire safe environment for 
the occupants.  

 
2.2.3.  Consultants vital role in achieving a fire safe buildings can not be exhausted. Profes-
sional commitment of consultants in planning , designing and executing projects suc-
cessfully to provide fire safe environment is of utmost importance.  

 
2.2.4.  Similar commitment and professionalism is expected from contractors executing 

projects on site. Adherence to approved drawings, approved specifications, ap-
proved material requirements can not be ignored at any stage of the project. 

 

2.2.5.  Manufacturers and suppliers shall be strictly committed to trading individual Emir-

ates’ Civil Defence approved materials. Inferior material quality can compromise 
everybody’s effort in creating fire safe environment. 

 
2.2.6.  The responsibilities required by this chapter are minimum guidelines and legally valid 
requirements to be fulfilled by the concerned parties and stakeholders. Violations of 
the requirements of this chapter are legally punishable. It is the responsibility of indi-
vidual stakeholder to obtain further information, evaluate and assess legal implica-
tions, where these requirements are violated. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1165 of 1348 

2.3.  Owner’s Responsibilities  

2.3.1.  Owner shall perform his responsibilities as per Table 18.1. 
 

Table 18.1: Owner’s Responsibilities 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  OWNER’S         

i.  Owner shall be responsible for nominating his representative to deliver own-

REPRESENTATIVE 

2.  CONTRACTS 

3. PLANNING 

er’s duties, as required by this section. Personnel having knowledge of Fire 
and Life safety, UAE Fire and Life Safety Code of Practice requirements will be 
an immense advantage to the owner. 

ii.  Evaluation of owner’s representative's qualification, capability and commit-
ment shall be owner’s responsibility and owner shall ensure that the repre-
sented personnel or the organization truly epitomizes of his own intentions. 

iii.  Where owner has appointed his representative, the term “Owner” in this 

section shall also mean “Owner’s representative”.  

i.  Owner shall ensure and be responsible to include in his legal contract docu-
ments with Insurance companies, Developers, Architects, Consultants, Con-
tractors, Manufacturers, Suppliers, Professionals and Facility management 
companies that “Fire and Life Safety Requirements from Civil Defence shall 
be strictly followed as per latest edition of UAE Fire and Life Safety Code of 
Practice, and other rules and regulations from Civil Defence.” 
It is owner’s responsibility to evaluate Consultant, House of Expertise, con-
tractor, Décor contractors, manufacturer, supplier, testing laboratories and 
certification body’s qualification and valid approval from Civil Defence, be-
fore awarding any contracts and making any agreement with them. 

ii. 

iii.  It is owner’s responsibility to ensure that contract documents clearly state 
that “All materials relevant to Fire and Life Safety, shall be approved and 
listed by individual Emirates’ Civil Defence.”. 

i.  Owner shall be involved with his team of consultants and contractors in the 
planning stage to discuss, enquire and convey his clear thoughts on the pro-
ject, fire safety requirements, estimated cost and its impact on the overall 
project execution process.  
Inability to understand the Civil Defence regulations during planning stage, 
can cause exponential fluctuations in budgeting in the later stages of the pro-
ject. 

ii. 

iii.  It is owner’s responsibility to monitor and police the “Over Design” approach-

es of consultants, which unnecessarily increases project costs. Similarly it is 
owner’s responsibility to be aware of “Value Engineering/Cost Effective” ap-
proaches which could be non-complaint to code requirements. 

4. APPROVALS 

i.  Civil Defence approvals for the projects shall be through owner appointed 

ii. 

consultant. 
It is owner’s responsibility to ensure that all parties involved in his project 
adhere to authority regulations and relevant approvals and building permits 
are obtained from concerned authorities. 

iii.  Owner shall ensure that construction does not commence without valid rele-

vant approvals and building permits. 

iv.  For construction accidents, fire accidents and such mishaps on construction 
sites where constructions have begun without authority approvals, the own-
er shall be held responsible. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1166 of 1348 

 

 

Table 18.1: Owner’s Responsibilities 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

5.  DURING          

CONSTRUCTION 

6.  INSPECTION AND 
COMMISSIONING 

i.  Owner shall ensure, through appointed program manager, developers and 

consultants, the Fire Safety of life and property during construction. 

ii.  Comply with the owner or owner’s representative’s (Program Manager) du-
ties and responsibilities during construction, as required by Chapter 12. Un-
der Construction, Table 12.1.   

iii.  Where owner feels the need to ensure that Fire and Life Safety Systems are 

being installed as per the design and approvals, a civil Defence approved and 
registered House of Expertise shall be appointed and monitored. 

1. PRE-COMMISSIONING AND INSPECTION 
 
i.  Where owner feels the need to appoint a third party to ensure the Fire and 

Life Safety systems of the facility are delivering their intended purpose, a 
Civil Defence registered and listed House of Expertise shall be appointed to 
inspect the final functioning of the Fire and Life Safety Systems. 

 
2. ACCEPTANCE TEST 
 
i.  Owner shall appoint Civil Defence registered facility management company 

during filed acceptance test stage. 
Field acceptance test witnessing shall be owner’s responsibility, through his 
appointed program manager, ensuring facility management personnel’s fa-
miliarity with facility and Fire and Life Safety aspects of the facility.  

ii. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1167 of 1348 

Table 18.1: Owner’s Responsibilities 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

7.  EMERGENCY 
EVACUATION 
PLAN  

8.  EMERGENCY 
EVACUATION 
PROCEDURES OR 
EMERGENCY   
ACTION PLAN 

i. 

ii. 

i. 

ii. 

It is owner’s responsibility to ensure consultant hands over Emergency Evac-
uation Plans, prepared as per Chapter 5., Table 5.1.8 . 
It is owner’s responsibility to ensure facility management and consultant 
jointly commission the emergency evacuation plans, verifying the authentic-
ity and applicability of such evacuation plan as per site conditions, furniture 
layouts etc., as per Chapter 5, Section 4. 

It is owner’s responsibility to develop customized, facility specific Emergen-
cy Evacuation Procedures and Emergency Action Plans through Civil Defence 
approved House of Expertise, in accordance with Chapter 19. Emergency 
Evacuation Procedures. 
Such Emergency Action plan shall take into consideration the personnel to 
be assigned for particular task, for particular actions to be taken, particular 
method of evacuation to be followed, decision to use elevators, coordina-
tion with Civil Defence personnel, assistance to be offered to old and disa-
bled people etc. during emergency situations. Emergency Action Plan shall 
be as per minimum guidelines of Chapter 19., Table 19.1. 

9. OCCUPYING 

i.  Owner shall not let any occupants occupy the building, in part or whole, 

10.  INSPECTION 

AND       
MAINTENANCE 

without Civil Defence final commissioning and clearance to do so. 

ii.  Owner shall not let any occupants occupy the building, in part or whole,  
without fully functional Fire and Life Safety Systems in the facility with re-
quired power backup, sufficient water supply and accessories. 

1. ANNUAL MAINTENANCE CONTRACT 
 
i.  Owner shall be responsible to appoint a Civil Defence approved and listed 
maintenance contractor, immediately upon commissioning to periodically 
inspect and maintain the Fire and Life Safety systems of the facility in accord-
ance with Table 18.1.10.2. 

ii.  Full record of periodic inspection and maintenance shall be documented and 

stored in the facility with facility management. 

iii.  Up to date inspection stickers shall be placed on equipment and systems to 

satisfy random inspections from Civil Defence. 

 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1168 of 1348 

Table 18.1: Owner’s Responsibilities 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

11. MODIFICATIONS 
OR CHANGE OF 
USAGE 

i. 

It is owner’s responsibility to ensure that usage of an approved building is 
not altered or changed from one type of occupancy to another without for-
mal application and approval from Civil Defence, through a consultant. 

ii.  No modifications, alterations to structure, facility, layout or Fire and Life 
Safety systems and equipment shall be allowed without formal approval 
from Civil Defence through consultants. 

12.   MULTIPLE             

i.  Where there is a possibility that the project will be sold to multiple entities’ 

OWNERS  

ownership, it is primary owner’s responsibility that the ownership and ac-
countability for Fire and Life Safety Systems are not disputed. 

ii.  Where common Fire and Life Safety Systems serve multiple owners, such as 

Hydrant network, LPG network, Fire water tanks and fire pump room, the 
inspection and maintenance shall be primary owner’s responsibility. 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1169 of 1348 

2.4.  Developer’s Responsibilities  

2.4.1.  Developer shall perform his responsibilities as per Table 18.2. 
 

Table 18.2: Developer’s Responsibilities 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  IN-HOUSE FIRE 

ENGINEER 

i.  Developer shall be responsible for appointing and designating at least one 
Fire Engineer who is  qualified and experienced in, Fire and Life Safety, UAE 
Fire and Life Safety Code of Practice, Civil Defence Laws and Regulations. 

2.  CONTRACTS 

i.  Developer shall ensure and be responsible to include in his legal contract 

documents with Insurance companies, Architects, Consultants, Contractors, 
Manufacturers, Suppliers, Professionals and Facility management companies 
that “Fire and Life Safety Requirements from Civil Defence shall be strictly 
followed as per latest edition of UAE Fire and Life Safety Code of Practice, 
and other rules and regulations from Civil Defence.” 
It is developer’s responsibility to evaluate Consultant, House of Expertise, 
Contractor, Décor contractors, Manufacturer, Supplier, Testing laboratories 
and Certification body’s qualification and valid approval from Civil Defence, 
before awarding any contracts and making any agreement with them. 

ii. 

iii.  It is developer’s responsibility to ensure that contract documents clearly 

state that “All materials relevant to Fire and Life Safety, shall be approved 
and listed by individual Emirates’ Civil Defence.”. 

3. PLANNING 

i.  Developer shall ensure that the above said in-house Fire engineer is involved 

in the project from very initial stages of brainstorming, planning, drafting, 
budgeting and preparing the scope of the project to highlight the Fire and 
Life Safety aspect and extent of the project. 
Inability to understand the Civil Defence regulations during planning stage, 
can cause exponential fluctuations in budgeting in the later stages of the pro-
ject. 

ii. 

iii.  Developer shall prepare a 10 minutes presentation of his over all project 

scope and shall introduce the project to Civil Defence for initial understand-
ing of Civil Defence requirements which must be met based on the total area 
of the project, the location of the development, the vicinity of Civil Defence 
Fire Station from the project, the connectivity of the project land to the ac-
cess roads etc. 

iv.  It is developer’s responsibility to monitor and police the “Over Design” ap-

proaches of consultants, which unnecessarily increases project costs. Similar-
ly it is developer’s responsibility to be aware of “Value Engineering/Cost 
Effective” approaches which could be non-complaint to code requirements. 

4.  MULTIPLE            

i.  Where there is a possibility that the development will be sold to multiple 

owners, it is developer’s responsibility that the ownership and accountability 
for Fire and Life Safety Systems are not disputed. 

ii.  Where common Fire and Life Safety Systems serve multiple owners, such as 

Hydrant network, LPG network, Fire water tanks and fire pump room, the 
inspection and maintenance shall be developer’s responsibility. 

OWNERS  

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1170 of 1348 

 

Table 18.2: Developer’s Responsibilities 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

5. INFRASTRUCTURE 

i.  Provision of Infrastructure in the intended development shall be the respon-

sibility of the developers. 

ii.  Scope of the Developer shall essentially include the following.                                                                        

a. Road network, satisfying the Fire Access Road requirements, in accord-
ance with Chapter 2. Fire Access.                                                                                                                
b. Private Yard Fire Hydrant System throughout the development complete 
with Fire Pump room and Fire Water Tank in accordance with Chapter 9. 
Section 4.10.                                                                                                                                  
c. Cooking fuel network such as LPG or Natural Gas Supply and Distribution 
throughout, where required for cooking, heating and manufacturing purpos-
es, in accordance with Chapter 11. 

6.  MASTER FIRE  
WATER TANK 

7. FIRE STATION 

i.  Developer has an option to provide a “master fire water tank” having capaci-
ty of 2 hour operating duration and providing tapping facility to cater to  all 
buildings in entire development. 

ii.  This arrangement will save the cost of individual fire water tanks in each 

building in the development. 

i.  Where development area span exceeds Civil Defence criteria or the develop-
ment is critical in terms of its distance from existing fire stations, it is the re-
sponsibility of the developer to provide a fire station in accordance with 
Chapter 2. Section 5. 

ii.  The criteria for the requirement of a fire station shall be discussed with Civil 
Defence during the introduction stage of the project, as mentioned in Table 
18.2.3.iii. 

8. APPROVALS 

i.  Civil Defence approvals for the infrastructure projects shall be through devel-

ii. 

oper appointed consultant. 
It is developer’s responsibility to ensure that all parties involved in his pro-
ject adhere to authority regulations and relevant approvals and building per-
mits are obtained from concerned authorities. 

iii.  Developer shall ensure that written message to consultant is clear that con-
struction does not commence without valid relevant approvals and building 
permits for the infrastructure. 

iv.  For construction accidents, fire accidents and such mishaps on construction 

sites where constructions have begun without authority approvals, the de-
veloper shall be held responsible. 

i.  Developer shall ensure that appointed consultant is responsible for the Fire 

Safety of life and property during construction. 

ii.  Developer shall ensure that his representative (Program Manager) comply 
with duties and responsibilities during construction, as required by Chapter 
12. Under Construction, Table 12.1.   

iii.  Where developer or Civil Defence feels the need to ensure that Fire and Life 

Safety Systems are being installed as per the design and approvals, a civil 
Defence approved and registered House of Expertise shall be appointed and 
monitored. 

9.  DURING          

CONSTRUCTION 

10. FINAL SIGN OFF 

i. 

ii. 

 

Developer shall sign off final acceptance documents from the consultants, 
undertaking that all the Fire and Life Safety aspect of the infrastructure are 
as per approved drawings and are in full compliance with UAE Fire and Life 
Safety Code of Practice. 
This signed undertaking conformity from developer shall be submitted to 
Civil Defence along with final inspection, testing and acceptance documents 
for Civil Defence completion certificate. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1171 of 1348 

2.5.  Consultant’s Responsibilities  

2.5.1.  Consultant shall perform his responsibilities as per Table 18.3. 
 

Table 18.3: Consultant’s Responsibilities 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  IN-HOUSE 
FIRE             
ENGINEERS 

i.  Consultant shall appoint permanent fire engineers, qualified, competent and ex-

perienced in Fire and Life Safety. 

ii.  Such a Fire engineers shall be well verse with the latest edition of UAE Fire and 

Life Safety Code of Practice. 

iii.  Such a fire engineers shall be well verse with “Drawing Submission” format, and 

online submission requirements, as required by Annexure 2. Drawing Submission 
Requirements. 

iv.  Consultant engineers shall be licensed by Civil Defence, based on their qualifica-

tions, training certificates and written examinations. 

2.  CONTRACTS 

i.  Consultant is responsible to include in his legal contract documents with Insur-

ance companies, Owners, Developers, Architects, House of Expertise, Contractors, 
Manufacturers, Suppliers, Professionals and Facility management companies that 
“Fire and Life Safety Requirements from Civil Defence shall be strictly followed 
as per latest edition of UAE Fire and Life Safety Code of Practice, and other rules 
and regulations from Civil Defence.” 
It is consultant’s responsibility to evaluate House of Expertise, contractors, Décor 
contractors, manufacturers, suppliers, testing laboratories and certification body’s 
qualification and valid approval from Civil Defence, before awarding any contracts 
and making any agreement with them. 

ii. 

iii.  It is consultant’s responsibility to ensure that contract documents clearly state 

that “All materials relevant to Fire and Life Safety, shall be approved and listed 
by individual Emirates’ Civil Defence.”. 

iv.  It is consultant’s responsibility to verify material test certificates and specifications 

in accordance with latest edition of UAE Fire and Life Safety Code of Practice. 

3. PLANNING 

i. 

ii. 

It is consultant’s responsibility to clearly convey to the owners and developers 
about Fire and Life Safety requirements of the project in the early stages of pro-
ject planning.  
Inability to understand the Civil Defence regulations during planning stage, can 
cause exponential fluctuations in budgeting in the later stages of the project. The  
consultant’s shall be held responsible for such deviations. 

iii.  It is consultant’s responsibility to approach Civil Defence to clarify any complicat-

ed issues very early in the planning stage. 

4. APPROVALS 

i.  Consultant alone is responsible and authorized to apply to Civil Defence for pro-

ii. 

ject approvals. 
It is consultant’s duty to submit full details for fire and life safety systems, clad-
ding, roofing, fire doors etc. in the submission. 

iii.  It is consultant’s responsibility and scope of work to comply in full to the “Drawing 

Submission” requirements as per Annexure 2. Drawing Submission Require-
ments. 

iv.  It is consultant’s responsibility to comply with online drawing submission proce-

dures (Refer to user manuals of individual Emirates’ Civil Defence) 

v.  Non compliance with “Drawing Submission” requirements such as colour coding, 

appropriate occupancy selection, drawings without scale etc. will unnecessarily 
delay the project review by Civil Defence. 

vi.  Resubmissions without rectifying the drawings and revising the project as per Civil 

Defence recommendations and comments will cost the consultants fines and 
time. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1172 of 1348 

 

 

ITEMS 

4. APPROVALS 

5.  INTERACTION 
WITH CIVIL      
DEFENCE 

Table 18.3: Consultant’s Responsibilities 

REQUIREMENTS 

vii.   Civil Defence approval is obtained through submission of either one time 
package (design NOC) or two packages (Design NOC and shop drawing ap-
proval) as required by individual Emirates’ Civil Defence.. 

viii.  Incomplete drawing submissions shall not be reviewed by Civil Defence and 

consultant shall be accountable for delays arising from such submissions. 

ix.    Where consultant has hired Civil Defence approved house of expertise, it shall 

be the consultant’s responsibility to submit house of expertise stamped 
drawings. House of expertise is not authorized to submit drawings to Civil 
Defence. 

x.     It is consultant’s duty to ensure that construction does not commence with-

out valid relevant approvals and building permits. 

xi.     For construction accidents, fire accidents and such mishaps on construction 
sites where constructions have begun without authority approvals, the con-
sultant shall be held responsible. 

i. 

ii. 

It is consultant’s responsibility and prerequisite to understand the fire and life 
safety code requirements through courses and trainings. It is not Civil Defence 
responsibility to educate consultants on Fire and Life safety basics. 
It is consultant’s responsibility to arrange fire engineers, architects, and fire 
systems engineers to discuss projects and code issues with Civil Defence, and 
not expect Civil Defence to conduct project meetings with non-professionals 
and office PRO’s who lack fire safety expertise to understand the discussions. 

iii.  Consultant’s shall fully explore the code compliance options before seeking 

Civil Defence involvement in decision making. 

iv.  Unnecessary and out of context discussions can be avoided to save time and 

efforts for both consultants and Civil Defence, if consultants prepare them-
selves with necessary drawings, schematics, history of comments from Civil 
Defence, code justifications and valid arguments, before seeking meetings 
with Civil Defence. 

v.  Consultant shall not seek Civil Defence’ assistance for every new project be-
fore creating online valid applications, unless there are application and fee 
complications. 

6.  DURING          

i.  Consultant, in coordination with owner’s program manager shall be responsi-

CONSTRUCTION 

ble to ensure the Fire Safety of life and property during construction. 

ii.  Consultant shall coordinate with the Owner or owner’s representative to pre-
pare written (Program Manager’s) duties and responsibilities during construc-
tion, as required by Chapter 12. Under Construction, Table 12.1.  

iii.  It is consultant’s responsibility to ensure every contractor has appointed dedi-
cated fire safety supervisor to monitor the onsite work by their team of work-
ers.  

iv.  It is consultant’s responsibility to inspect construction and installation work 

and supervise contractors to ensure that the onsite proceedings are in compli-
ance with Civil Defence approved drawings and specifications.  
It is consultant’s responsibility to verify the materials and components being 
used in construction and installation are same as specified and approved. 

v. 

vi.  Consultant shall inspect Fire stopping, cladding voids, concealed piping, under-

ground installations etc. while they are exposed for inspections and certify 
before concealing permanently. 

vii.  Where consultant feels the need to ensure that Fire and Life Safety Systems 

are being installed as per the design and approvals, and materials are as speci-
fied in approvals, a civil Defence approved and registered House of Expertise 
shall be appointed and monitored. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1173 of 1348 

Table 18.3: Consultant’s Responsibilities 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

7.  INSPECTION,  

COMMISSIONING 
AND HANDING 
OVER 

1. PRE-COMMISSIONING AND INSPECTION 
 
i. 

It is consultant's duty to perform pre-commissioning inspection and testing 
to confirm the readiness of the building for final inspection and commission-
ing, before inviting Civil Defence team for inspection. 

ii.  Consultant shall inspect and verify each and every aspect of Fire and Life 

Safety features of the building and shall document the same. 

iii.  Where consultants appoint a third party to ensure the Fire and Life Safety 

systems of the facility are delivering their intended purpose, a Civil Defence 
registered and listed House of Expertise shall be appointed to inspect the 
final functioning of the Fire and Life Safety Systems, before inviting Civil De-
fence for commissioning. 

 
2. ACCEPTANCE TEST AND HANDING OVER 
 
i. 

Consultant shall ensure that commissioning of Fire and Life safety aspect of 
the building shall be in whole and not part by part or in phases, unless Civil 
Defence inspection team consent is obtained. 
It is consultant’s duty to ensure that all fire and Life safety systems are func-
tioning as intended. 

ii. 

iii.  Consultant shall ensure that hand Fire and Life Safety System approved 

drawings from Civil Defence, operating manual, maintenance manuals and 
required spare parts from contractors are handed over to owner or owner 
or owner’s representatives. 

iv.  Consultant shall ensure Fire and Life Safety Systems’ Software along with 

required passwords from respective contractors are handed over to owner 
representatives. 

v.  Consultant shall verify that Means of egress components such as Doors, 

Stairs and exits are as per acceptance criteria of Chapter 3. Section 6. 

vi.  Consultant shall verify that Fire extinguishers are as per acceptance criteria 

of Chapter 4. Table 4.4.1. and Manufacturer’s instructions. 

vii.  Consultant shall verify that Exit Signs are acceptable as per Chapter 5, Sec-

tion 4. and Manufacturer’s instructions. 

viii.  Consultant shall verify that Emergency Lighting system is acceptable as per 

Chapter 6, Section 6. and Manufacturer’s instructions. 

ix.  Consultant shall verify that Voice evacuation system, if any, is acceptable as 

per Chapter 7, Section 4. and Manufacturer’s instructions. 

x.  Consultant shall verify that Fire Detection and Alarm system is acceptable as 

per Chapter 8, Section 5.5. and Manufacturer’s instructions. 

xi.  Consultant shall verify that Fire Protection systems are acceptable as per 

Chapter 9, Section 5. and Manufacturer’s instructions. 

xii.  Consultant shall verify that Smoke Control System, if any, is acceptable as 

per Chapter 10, Section 5, Section 6. and Manufacturer’s instructions. 

xiii.  Consultant shall verify that LPG system, if any, is acceptable as per Chapter 

11, Section 5. and Manufacturer’s instructions. 

xiv.  Consultant shall verify that Kitchen hood Suppression Systems, if any, is ac-

cepted as per Manufacturer’s instructions. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1174 of 1348 

Table 18.3: Consultant’s Responsibilities 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

8.  EMERGENCY 
EVACUATION 
PLAN 

i. 

ii. 
iii. 

Preparation of Emergency Evacuation Plan is consultant’s responsibility and 
scope of work. 
Emergency Evacuation Plan shall comply with Chapter 5., Table 5.1.8 . 
It is consultant’s responsibility to ensure facility management is involved in 
commissioning the emergency evacuation plans, verifying the authenticity 
and applicability of such evacuation plan as per site conditions, furniture 
layouts etc., as per Chapter 5, Section 4. 

i. 

9.  MODIFICATIONS 
TO CIVIL DEFENCE 
APPROVED 
DRAWINGS 

Any modifications on site, to buildings or Fire and Life Safety systems or 
change of usage of the building, shall require re-approval by Civil Defence. It 
is consultant’s responsibility to make changes to approved drawings as per 
modifications on site and reapply to Civil Defence as “revised” for revision 
approvals. 

10. CODE                  

i. 

COMPLIANCE 

The overall code compliance of a project is complete responsibility of the 
consultant, in coordination with owner and contractors. 

iii. 

ii.  Approval from Civil Defence for any project drawings is based on minimum 
requirements and it does not relief consultant from his responsibility to ver-
ify and explore additional code compliance requirements from latest edition 
of UAE Fire and Life Safety Code of Practice and The International Codes 
and Standards referred within. 
It is consultant’s responsibility not to “Over Design” Fire and Life Safety as-
pects in a project, which unnecessarily increases project costs to the owner. 
Similarly it is consultant’s responsibility to be cautious when adopting 
“Value Engineering/Cost Effective” approaches which could be non-
complaint to code requirements. A careful in-depth analysis of Code re-
quirements in the initial planning stage will save consultant valuable time 
and money. 

Consultant shall sign off final handing over documents to the owner, under-
taking that all the Fire and Life Safety aspect of the building are as per ap-
proved drawings and are in full compliance with UAE Fire and Life Safety 
Code of Practice. 
This signed undertaking conformity from consultant shall be submitted to 
Civil Defence along with final inspection, testing and handing over docu-
ments for Civil Defence completion certificate to occupy the building. 

11. FINAL SIGN OFF 

i. 

ii. 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1175 of 1348 

2.6.  Contractor’s (Installation and Maintenance) Responsibilities  

2.6.1.  Contractor shall perform his responsibilities as per Table 18.4. 

Table 18.4: Contractor’s (Installation and Maintenance) Responsibilities 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  MANPOWER 

i.  Contractors shall have qualified and experienced engineers and technicians, who 

are well versed in their respective Fire and Life Safety Systems’ Design, Installa-
tion and Inspection. 

ii.  Contractor engineers shall be well verse with latest edition of UAE Fire and Life 

Safety Code of Practice. 

iii.  Contractor engineers and technicians shall have valid training certificates from 

specialized training bodies. 

iv.  Contractor shall be registered in the applicable category and approved by Civil 

Defence as per applicable decrees and regulations.  

v.  Contractor engineers and technicians shall be licensed by Civil Defence, based on 

their qualifications, training certificates and written examinations.  

vi.  Each engineer must pass Civil Defence examinations, in their respective chosen 

fields as per the required passing marks.  

vii.  Each technician must pass Civil Defence examinations, in their respective chosen 

fields as per the required passing marks.  

viii. The required number of engineers and technicians shall as per applicable de-

crees and regulations.   

ix.  Each engineer and technician shall be familiar with 2 system subjects.  
x.  However, these requirements are subject to changes in applicable laws, de-

crees and regulations of Civil Defence. It is Installation and Maintenance con-
tractor’s responsibility to verify the latest requirements with Civil Defence.  

2.  SCOPE OF 

WORK 

1.  GENERAL 
 
i.  When the contracting companies obtain the Civil Defense registration and li-

cense, they shall be authorized to install, inspect, issue installation certificates, 
and perform periodical maintenance works through annual maintenance con-
tracts. 

ii.  The experience requirements for engineers and technicians shall be as per appli-

cable decrees and regulations. (Please verify with Civil Defence for latest ver-
sion) 

iii.  Contracting companies are licensed based on categorized as follows. 
 
2.   CATEGORY A                                                                                                                                    

AUTHORIZED TO WORK IN BUILDINGS WITH ANY HEIGHT AND ANY AREA                   
ON FIRE ALARM AND VOICE EVACUATION SYSTEM, EMERGENCY LIGHTING, EX-
IT SIGNAGE SYSTEM, FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS AND SMOKE CONTROL SYS-
TEMS (OPTIONAL) 

 
i.  The installation and maintenance company registered under this category re-
quires 3 Electrical or equivalent subject engineers, 3 Mechanical or equivalent 
subject Engineers, 12 Electrical or equivalent subject Technicians and 12 Me-
chanical or equivalent subject Technicians, as per required experiences. 

ii.  Category A company can work on any buildings, of any height and any area.  
iii.  Category A company has an option of including or excluding Ventilation and 

Smoke control Systems from their scope of work. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1176 of 1348 

Table 18.4: Contractor’s (Installation and Maintenance) Responsibilities 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

2.  SCOPE 

OF 
WORK 

3.   CATEGORY B                                                                                                                                      
AUTHORIZED TO WORK ON BUILDINGS HAVING HEIGHT LESS THAN 46 m AND  AREA 
LESS THAN 15,000 m2,                                                                                                               
ON FIRE ALARM AND VOICE EVACUATION SYSTEM, EMERGENCY LIGHTING, EXIT 
SIGNAGE SYSTEM, FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS, VENTILATION  AND SMOKE CONTROL 
SYSTEMS (OPTIONAL) 

 
i.  The installation and maintenance company registered under this category requires 2 

Electrical or equivalent subject engineers, 2 Mechanical or equivalent subject Engi-
neers, 8 Electrical or equivalent subject Technicians and 8 Mechanical or equivalent 
subject Technicians, as per required experiences. 

ii.  Category B company can work on buildings, having building height of not more than 46 

m and an area not exceeding 15,000 m2 . 

iii.  Category B company has an option of including or excluding Ventilation and Smoke 

control Systems from their scope of work. 

 
4.   CATEGORY C                                                                                                                                          

AUTHORIZED TO WORK ON BUILDINGS HAVING HEIGHT LESS THAN 23 m AND  AREA 
LESS THAN 6500 m2                                                                                                                                   
ON FIRE ALARM AND VOICE EVACUATION SYSTEM, EMERGENCY LIGHTING, EXIT 
SIGNAGE SYSTEM, FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEM, VENTILATION AND SMOKE CONTROL 
SYSTEM (OPTIONAL), AND NON-WATER BASED/GAS SUPPRESSION SYSTEM 
(OPTIONAL) 

 
i.  The installation and maintenance company registered under this category requires 2 

Electrical or equivalent subject  engineers, 2 Mechanical or equivalent subject Engi-
neers, 4 Electrical or equivalent subject Technicians and 4 Mechanical or equivalent 
subject Technicians. 

ii.  Category C company can work on buildings, having building height of not more than 23 

m and an area not exceeding 6300 m2 . 

iii.  Category C Companies have options of including or excluding Ventilation and Smoke 

control Systems and Non-water based/Gaseous Suppression Systems from their scope 
of work. 

 
5.   CATEGORY D                                                                                                                                            

AUTHORIZED TO WORK IN BUILDINGS WITH ANY HEIGHT AND ANY AREA                   
ON LPG/NATURAL GAS INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE 

 
i.  The installation and maintenance company registered under this category requires 1 

Electrical or equivalent subject engineer, 1 Mechanical or equivalent subject Engineer, 
3 Electrical or equivalent subject Technicians and 3 Mechanical or equivalent subject 
Technicians as per required experiences 

ii.  Category D company can work on LPG//Natural Gas installations and maintenance on 

any buildings. 

 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1177 of 1348 

Table 18.4: Contractor’s (Installation and Maintenance) Responsibilities 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

2.  SCOPE OF 

6.   CATEGORY E                                                                                                                                           

WORK 

AUTHORIZED TO WORK IN BUILDINGS WITH ANY HEIGHT AND ANY AREA                                                                                                                                          
ON VENTILATION AND SMOKE CONTROL SYSTEM INSTALLATION AND MAINTE-
NANCE 

 
i.  The installation and maintenance company registered under this category requires 1 

Electrical or equivalent subject  engineers, 1 Mechanical or equivalent subject Engi-
neer, 3 Electrical or equivalent subject Technicians and 3 Mechanical or equivalent 
subject  Technicians. 

ii.  Category E company can work exclusively on Ventilation and Smoke Control Sys-

tems, Smoke/Fire curtains, Smoke/Fire Dampers installations and maintenance on 
any buildings. 

 
7.   CATEGORY F                                                                                                                                                  

AUTHORIZED TO WORK IN BUILDINGS WITH ANY HEIGHT AND ANY AREA                                                                                                                                                                                         
ON FIRE DOOR/FIRE WINDOWS/ FIRE AND SMOKE BARRIERS/PARTITIONS INSTAL-
LATION AND MAINTENANCE 

 
i.  The installation and maintenance company registered under this category requires 6 

specialists, experienced in fields of license.   

ii.  Category F company can work on Fire/Smoke Doors and partitions installations and 

maintenance on any buildings. 

 
8.   CATEGORY G                                                                                                                                  
AUTHORIZED TO WORK IN BUILDINGS WITH ANY HEIGHT AND ANY AREA                    
ON FIRE STOPPING SYSTEMS AND MATERIALS INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE 

 
i.  The installation and maintenance company registered under this category requires 2 

Fire stopping Specialists, 6 Fire stopping Technicians. 

ii.  Category G company can work on Fire Stopping systems and materials, penetration 
seals, perimeter fire stopping, curtainwall fire stopping systems and materials instal-
lations and maintenance on any buildings. 

 
9.   CATEGORY H                                                                                                                                           

AUTHORIZED TO WORK IN BUILDINGS WITH ANY HEIGHT AND ANY AREA               
ON EXTERIOR WALL FAÇADE AND EXTERIOR WALL COVERING, GLAZING AND 
ROOFING SYSTEM INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE 

 
i.  The installation and maintenance company registered under this category requires 1 

Façade/Glazing/Roofing Specialist, 1 Civil Engineer, 3 Façade/Glazing/Roofing Tech-
nicians and 3 Mechanical or Fabrication Technicians. 

ii.  Category H company, depending on their manpower expertise, can work on Exterior 

Wall Facade/Glazing/Roofing systems, installations and maintenance on any build-
ings. 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1178 of 1348 

 

 

ITEMS 

Table 18.4: Contractor’s (Installation and Maintenance) Responsibilities 

REQUIREMENTS 

3.  CONTRACTS  i.  Contractor is responsible to include in his legal contract documents, be it installa-

tion or maintenance or both, with Insurance companies, Owners, Consultants, oth-
er Contractors, Manufacturers, Suppliers, Professionals and Facility management 
companies that “Fire and Life Safety Requirements from Civil Defence shall be 
strictly followed as per latest edition of UAE Fire and Life Safety Code of Practice, 
and other rules and regulations from Civil Defence.” 
It is contractor’s responsibility to verify that suppliers of fire and life safety sys-
tems, devices, equipment and materials have valid license for products and com-
pany registration from individual Emirates’ Civil Defence, before placing order for 
products and making any agreement with them. 

ii. 

iii.  It is contractor’s responsibility to ensure that contract documents clearly state that 
“All the materials relevant to Fire and Life Safety, shall be approved and listed by 
individual Emirates’ Civil Defence.”. 

iv.  It is contractor’s responsibility to verify material test certificates and specifications 

in accordance with latest edition of UAE Fire and Life Safety Code of Practice. 

v.  Maintenance contracts’ periodic activity and required repetitions annually shall be 

as per Table 18.4.8.3. 

4. PLANNING 

1.  INSTALLATION 
 
i. 

It is contractor’s responsibility to verify scope of work clearly with consultant and 
ensure that consultant’s scope of work document addresses all the aspects of Fire 
and Life Safety Systems, in depth and in accordance with UAE Fire and Life Safety 
Code of practice.  
Inability to understand the Civil Defence regulations during execution planning 
stage, can cause exponential fluctuations in budgeting in the later stages of the 
project. For such deviations contractors shall be held responsible. 

ii. 

iii.  It is contractor’s responsibility to approach consultant to clarify any complicated 

issues very early in the execution planning stage. 

 
2.  MAINTENANCE 
 
i. 

It is contractor’s responsibility to verify scope of work, spare parts availability, re-
pair and replacement issues clearly with owners during annual maintenance con-
tract agreement. 

5. APPROVALS  1.  INSTALLATION 

 
i. 

It is contractor’s duty to understand that there will be no shop drawing approvals 
for fire and life safety systems, or cladding or fire doors approvals through contrac-
tors. However, individual emirates’ Civil Defence might have different approaches 
to shop drawing approvals for contractors. It is contractor’s duty to verify this re-
quirement with individual emirates’ Civil Defence. 

ii.  Consultant alone is responsible and authorized to apply to Civil Defence for project 

approvals. Thus it is contractor’s responsibility to insist on execution of work only 
upon receiving final Civil Defence approved drawings from consultant. 

iii.  It is contractor’s responsibility to insist on detailed material specifications, in ac-

cordance with UAE Fire and Life Safety Code of Practice, from consultant. 

iv.  Contractor shall not start executing work on site with construction, earthwork, in-

stallation, programming, or any such activity related to Fire and Life Safety without 
final Civil Defence approved drawings from consultant. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1179 of 1348 

 

Table 18.4: Contractor’s Responsibilities 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

6.  PRODUCTS/

MATERIALS/  
SYSTEMS 

i.  Selection of materials, systems, products and components required for the 
project or maintenance is contractor’s responsibility and it shall comply to 
consultant’s specifications based on Civil Defence approved drawings. 

ii.  Contractors are prohibited to install or use any materials, products and com-

ponents that are not registered and listed by individual Emirates’ Civil De-
fence. 

iii.  It is contractor’s responsibility to verify supplier’s valid registration, license 

and approvals from individual Emirates’ Civil Defence. 

iv.  Contractors are prohibited to procure materials, products and systems from 
suppliers who do not have license or whose license from individual Emirates’ 
Civil Defence is not valid or expired. 

7.  DURING                

i.  Contractor shall be responsible for the Fire Safety of life and property during 

INSTALLATION 
OR              
MAINTENANCE 

execution of his scope of work. 

ii.  Contractor shall coordinate with the Owner or owner’s representative to ob-
serve (Program Manager’s) duties and responsibilities during construction or 
maintenance, as required by Chapter 12. Under Construction, Table 12.1.  

iii.  It is contractor’s responsibility to appoint dedicated fire safety supervisor to 

monitor the onsite work by their team of workers.  

iv.  It is contractor’s responsibility to coordinate and cooperate with consultant 

v. 

during construction and installation to ensure that the onsite proceedings are 
in compliance with Civil Defence approved drawings and specifications.  
It is contractor’s responsibility to verify the materials and components sup-
plied and being used in construction and installation or maintenance are 
same as specified and approved. 

vi.  It is contractor’s responsibility to initiate inspection request and seek clear-
ance from consultant for fire stopping, cladding voids, concealed spaces, un-
derground works etc. before closing concealed spaces, voids or backfilling. 

vii.  Any onsite changes, discrepancies or deviations or non compliances arise 

during construction and installation, it is contractor’s responsibility to bring 
the matter immediately to consultant’s notice to resolve the matter. 

viii. It is each contractor’s responsibility to cooperate and coordinate with other 

contractors and their scope and systems, where interfacing or interaction 
arises between different types of systems and different parties involved in 
execution. 

ix.  It is contractor’s responsibility to store their materials, products and compo-

nents in accordance with manufacturer’s and supplier’s guidelines and to 
observe care with storage temperatures, humidity, dust, impact and vibra-
tion such that materials, products and components to be installed are not 
damaged or impaired. 

8.  CODE                   

i.  Civil Defence approved drawings from consultants do not relief contractors 

COMPLAINCE 

 

from adhering to detailed installation requirements in accordance with latest 
edition of UAE Fire and Life Safety Code of practice and the International 
Codes and Standards referred within. 
It is contractors responsibility to comply with complete installation guidelines 
from manufacturers along with full compliance of installation guidelines from 
UAE Fire and Life Safety Code of Practice. 

ii. 

iii.  During maintenance, it is contractor’s responsibility to highlight to the own-
er, any non compliances existing in the systems for owner’s action and deci-
sions to rectify.  

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1180 of 1348 

 

 

ITEMS 

9.  INSPECTION,  

COMMISSIONING 
AND HANDING 
OVER 

Table 18.4: Contractor’s Responsibilities 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. PRE-COMMISSIONING AND INSPECTION 
 
i. 

It is contractor’s duty to perform pre-commissioning inspection and testing 
to confirm the readiness of the building for final inspection and commission-
ing, before inviting consultant for inspection. 

ii.  Contractor shall inspect and verify each and every aspect of Fire and Life 

Safety features of the building and shall document the same in detailed re-
ports. 

iii.  It is contractor’s responsibility to coordinate and cooperate with consultants, 

owner’s representatives and house of expertise, if on board, to jointly in-
spect Fire and Life Safety Systems to ensure Fire and Life Safety Systems are 
installed successfully as intended. 

iv.  It is contractor’s responsibility to rectify, revise and re-work on any short 
comings pointed out during such joint inspections before inviting Civil De-
fence for final inspection and commissioning. 

 
2. ACCEPTANCE TEST AND HANDING OVER 
 
i. 

Each contractor shall ensure that commissioning of his scope of Fire and Life 
safety aspect of the building shall be in whole and not part by part or in 
phases. 

iii. 

ii.  Contractors shall thoroughly test their scope of Fire and Life Safety Systems 
and demonstrate that all systems are functioning as per the manufacturer’s 
specification and as intended by the Civil Defence approved consultant 
drawings. 
It is contractor’s responsibility to coordinate and cooperate with consultant 
in handing over Fire and Life Safety System operating manual, maintenance 
manuals, testing reports and required spare parts to the consultant. 
It is contractor’s responsibility to coordinate and cooperate with consultant 
in handing over Fire and Life Safety Systems’ Software along with required 
passwords to the consultant. 

iv. 

v.  Respective contractors shall test and demonstrate that Means of egress 

components such as Doors, Stairs and exits are as per acceptance criteria of 
Chapter 3. Section 6. 

vi.  Respective contractors shall verify and demonstrate that Fire extinguishers 

are as per acceptance criteria of Chapter 4. Table 4.4.1. and Manufacturer’s 
instructions. 

vii.  Respective contractors shall verify and demonstrate that Exit Signs are ac-

ceptable as per Chapter 5, Section 4. and Manufacturer’s instructions. 

viii.  Respective contractors shall test and demonstrate that Emergency Lighting 

system is acceptable as per Chapter 6, Section 6. and Manufacturer’s in-
structions. 

ix.  Respective contractors shall test and demonstrate Voice evacuation system, 

if any, is acceptable as per Chapter 7, Section 4. and Manufacturer’s in-
structions. 

x.  Respective contractors shall test and demonstrate that Fire Detection and 
Alarm system is acceptable as per Chapter 8, Section 5.5. and Manufactur-
er’s instructions. 

xi.  Respective contractors shall test and demonstrate that Fire Protection sys-

tems are acceptable as per Chapter 9, Section 5. and Manufacturer’s in-
structions. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1181 of 1348 

Table 18.4: Contractor’s Responsibilities 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

9.  INSPECTION,  

COMMISSIONING 
AND HANDING 
OVER 

xii.   Respective contractors shall test and demonstrate that Smoke Control Sys-
tem, if any, is acceptable as per Chapter 10, Section 5 and Manufacturer’s 
instructions. 

xiii.  Respective contractors shall test and demonstrate that LPG system, if any, is 

acceptable as per Chapter 11, Section 5. and Manufacturer’s instructions. 
xiv.   Respective contractors shall test and demonstrate that Kitchen hood Sup-
pression Systems, if any, is accepted as per Manufacturer’s instructions. 

 
3. MAINTENANCE 
 
i. 
ii. 
iii.  Exit Signs shall be maintained as per Chapter 5, Section 4. 
iv.  Emergency Lighting system shall be maintained as per Chapter 6, Section 6. 
v.  Voice evacuation system, if any, shall be maintained as per Chapter 7, Sec-

Doors, Exits, Stairs shall be maintained as per Chapter 3. Section 6. 
Fire extinguishers shall be maintained as per Chapter 4. Table 4.4.1. 

tion 4. 

vi.  Fire Detection and Alarm system shall be maintained as per Chapter 8, Sec-

tion 5.5. 

vii.  Fire Protection systems shall be maintained as per Chapter 9, Section 5. 
viii.  Smoke Control System, if any, shall be maintained as per Chapter 10,       

Section 5. 

ix.  LPG system, if any, shall be maintained as per Chapter 11, Section 5. 
x.  Kitchen hood suppression system, if any, shall be maintained as per Manu-

facturer’s instructions. 

xi.  Fire stopping systems shall be maintained as per Chapter 1, Section 3. 

10. FINAL SIGN OFF 

i. 

ii. 

iii. 

Contractor shall sign off final handing over documents to the consultant, 
undertaking that all the Fire and Life Safety aspect of the building are as per 
approved drawings, approved material and product specifications and are in 
full compliance with UAE Fire and Life Safety Code of Practice. 
It is contractor’s responsibility to sign off and handover “Installation Certifi-
cates” to the consultant, when installation is the contractual agreement. 
It is contractor’s responsibility to sign off and handover “Maintenance Cer-
tificate” to the owner, when maintenance is the contractual agreement. 

iv.  This signed undertaking conformity from contractor shall be submitted to 
Civil Defence along with final inspection, testing, warranty documents and 
handing over documents for Civil Defence NOC to occupy the building. 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1182 of 1348 

2.7.  Décor Contractor’s (Fit-Out Contractor) Responsibilities  

2.7.1.  Décor Contractor shall perform his responsibilities as per Table 18.5. 

Table 18.5: Décor Contractor’s Responsibilities 

ITEMS 

iREQUIREMENTS 

1.  ENGINEERS 

i.  Décor Contractors shall have qualified and experienced engineers, who are well 

verse in the Fire and Life Safety aspects of the tenant space and fit-out work. 

ii.  Such engineers shall be well verse with the latest edition of UAE Fire and Life Safe-

ty Code of Practice. 

iii.  Such engineers shall be well verse with “Drawing Submission” format, and online 

submission requirements as required by Annexure 2. Drawing Submission Re-
quirements. 

iv.  Décor contracting engineers shall be licensed by Civil Defence, based on their qual-

ifications, training certificates and written examinations. 

2.  CONTRACTS  i.  Décor Contractor is responsible to include in his legal contract documents with 
Insurance companies, Owners, Consultants, other Contractors, Manufacturers, 
Suppliers, Professionals and Facility management companies that “Fire and Life 
Safety Requirements from Civil Defence shall be strictly followed as per latest 
edition of UAE Fire and Life Safety Code of Practice, and other rules and regula-
tions from Civil Defence.” 
It is Décor contractor’s responsibility to evaluate manufacturers’ and suppliers’ 
qualifications, valid approval for their products and their company registration by 
Civil Defence, before placing order for products and entering any agreement with 
them. 

ii. 

iii.  It is Décor contractor’s responsibility to ensure that contract documents clearly 
state that “All the materials relevant to Fire and Life Safety, shall be approved 
and listed by individual Emirates’ Civil Defence.”. 

iv.  It is Décor contractor’s responsibility to verify material test certificates and specifi-
cations in accordance with latest edition of UAE Fire and Life Safety Code of Prac-
tice. 

3. PLANNING 

i. 

ii. 

It is Décor contractor’s responsibility to clearly convey to the owners and consult-
ants about Fire and Life Safety requirements of the project in the early stages of 
project planning.  
Inability to understand the Civil Defence regulations during planning stage, can 
cause exponential fluctuations in budgeting in the later stages of the project. For 
such deviations Décor contractor shall be held responsible. 

iii.  It is Décor contractor’s responsibility to approach consultant and owner to clarify 

code compliance issues very early in the planning stage. 

4. APPROVALS 

i.  Décor contractor is responsible and authorized to apply to Civil Defence for fit-out 

ii. 

and décor project approvals. 
It is Décor contractor’s duty to understand that there will be no shop drawing ap-
provals for fire and life safety systems, or cladding or fire doors approvals through 
contractors. 

iii.  It is Décor contractor’s responsibility and scope of work to comply in full to the 

“Drawing Submission” requirements as per Annexure 2. Drawing Submission Re-
quirements. 

iv.  It is Décor contractor’s responsibility to comply with online drawing submission 

procedures (Refer to user manuals of individual Emirates’ Civil Defence) 

v.    Non compliance with “Drawing Submission” requirements such as colour coding, 

appropriate occupancy selection, drawings without scale etc. will unnecessarily 
delay the project review by Civil Defence. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1183 of 1348 

 

 

ITEMS 

4. APPROVALS 

5.  INTERACTION 
WITH CIVIL      
DEFENCE 

Table 18.5: Décor Contractor’s Responsibilities 

REQUIREMENTS 

vi.   Resubmissions without rectifying the drawings and revising the project as per 
Civil Defence recommendations and comments will cost the Décor contractor 
fines and time. 

vii.  Civil Defence approval is “one time” approval for complete design package with 
full details of involved fire and life safety systems in the project, including mate-
rial specifications. 

viii.  Incomplete drawing submissions shall not be reviewed by Civil Defence and Dé-

cor contractor shall be accountable for delays arising from such submissions. 
ix.   It is Décor contractor’s duty to ensure that site work/construction/installation 

does not commence without valid relevant approvals from Civil Defence and 
building permits. 

x.    The décor contractor shall be held responsible for construction accidents, fire 

accidents and such mishaps on construction sites where site work/construction/
installation have begun without authority approvals. 

i. 

ii. 

It is Décor contractor’s responsibility and prerequisite to understand the fire and 
life safety code requirements through courses and trainings. It is not Civil De-
fence responsibility to educate Décor contractors on Fire and Life safety basics. 
It is Décor contractor’s responsibility to arrange fire engineers, architects, and 
fire systems engineers to discuss projects and code issues with Civil Defence, and 
not expect Civil Defence to conduct project meetings with non-professionals and 
office PRO’s who are unable to understand the discussions. 

iii.  Décor contractor’s shall fully explore the code compliance options before seek-

ing Civil Defence involvement in decision making. 

iv.  Unnecessary and out of context discussions can be avoided to save time and 
efforts for both Décor contractors and Civil Defence, if Décor contractors pre-
pare themselves with necessary drawings, schematics, history of comments from 
Civil Defence, code justifications and valid arguments, before seeking meetings 
with Civil Defence. 

6.  DURING          

i.  Décor contractor shall be responsible for the Fire Safety of life and property dur-

CONSTRUC-
TION 

ing fit-out construction. 

ii.  Décor contractor shall coordinate with the Owner or owner’s representative to 

prepare written (Program Manager’s) duties and responsibilities during construc-
tion, as required by Chapter 12. Under Construction, Table 12.1.  

iii.  It is Décor contractor’s responsibility to appoint dedicated fire safety supervisor 

to monitor the onsite work by their team of workers.  

iv.  It is Décor contractor’s responsibility to interact and coordinate with consultant 
to inspect construction and installation work to ensure that the onsite proceed-
ings are in compliance with Civil Defence approved drawings and specifications.  
It is Décor contractor’s responsibility to verify the materials and components 
being used in construction and installation are same as specified and approved 
by consultant and Civil Defence. 

v. 

vi.  Décor contractor shall inspect Fire stopping, cladding voids, concealed piping, 
underground installations etc. while they are still exposed for inspections and 
take clearance from consultant before concealing permanently. 

vii.  Where Décor contractor feels the need to ensure that Fire and Life Safety Sys-
tems are being installed as per the design and approvals, and materials are as 
specified in approvals, a civil Defence approved and registered House of Exper-
tise shall be appointed and monitored. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1184 of 1348 

Table 18.5: Décor Contractor’s Responsibilities 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. PRE-COMMISSIONING AND INSPECTION 
 
i. 

ii. 

It is Décor contractor’s duty to ensure that Fire and Life Safety aspect of their 
scope of work is inspected and testing to confirm the readiness, before in-
viting Civil Defence team for inspection. 
It is Décor contractor’s responsibility to coordinate and cooperate with Con-
sultants and contractors to inspect and verify satisfactory functionality of 
each and every aspect of Fire and Life Safety features of the building and 
shall document the same. 

iii.  Where Décor contractors appoint a third party to ensure the Fire and Life 
Safety systems of the facility are delivering their intended purpose, a Civil 
Defence registered and listed House of Expertise shall be appointed to in-
spect the final functioning of the Fire and Life Safety Systems, before inviting 
individual Emirates’ Civil Defence for commissioning. 

 
2. ACCEPTANCE TEST AND HANDING OVER 
 
i. 

Décor contractor shall ensure that commissioning of Fire and Life safety as-
pect of the tenant space shall be in whole and not part by part or in phases, 
unless Civil Defence inspection team consent is obtained. 

ii.  Décor contractor shall involve owner, owner’s representatives, owner ap-
pointed facility management and consultant for the acceptance test and 
acceptance test reports shall be signed by all parties jointly. 

iii.  Décor contractor shall hand over Fire and Life Safety System approved 

drawings from Civil Defence, operating manual, maintenance manuals and 
required spare parts, if any. 

iv.  Décor contractor shall handover Fire and Life Safety Systems’ Software, if 

any, along with required passwords. 

v.  Décor contractor, where means of egress was scope of work, shall verify 

that Means of egress components such as Doors, Stairs and exits are as per 
acceptance criteria of Chapter 3. Section 6. 

vi.  Décor contractor shall verify that Fire extinguishers are as per acceptance 

criteria of Chapter 4. Table 4.4.1. and Manufacturer’s instructions. 

vii.  Décor contractor shall verify that Exit Signs are acceptable as per Chapter 5, 

Section 4. and Manufacturer’s instructions. 

viii.  Décor contractor shall verify that Emergency Lighting system is acceptable 

as per Chapter 6, Section 6. and Manufacturer’s instructions. 

ix.  Décor contractor shall verify that Voice evacuation system, if any, is ac-
ceptable as per Chapter 7, Section 4. and Manufacturer’s instructions. 
x.  Décor contractor shall verify that Fire Detection and Alarm system is ac-

ceptable as per Chapter 8, Section 5.5. and Manufacturer’s instructions. 

xi.  Décor contractor shall verify that Fire Protection systems are acceptable as 

per Chapter 9, Section 5. and Manufacturer’s instructions. 

xii.  Décor contractor shall verify that Smoke Control System, if any, is accepta-

ble as per Chapter 10, Section 5 and Manufacturer’s instructions. 

xiii.  Décor contractor shall verify that LPG system, if any, is acceptable as per 

Chapter 11, Section 5. and Manufacturer’s instructions. 

xiv.  Décor contractor shall verify that Kitchen hood Suppression Systems, if any, 

is accepted as per Manufacturer’s instructions. 

7.  INSPECTION,  

COMMISSIONING 
AND HANDING 
OVER 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1185 of 1348 

Table 18.5: Décor Contractor’s Responsibilities 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

i. 

ii. 

i. 

8.  EMERGENCY 
EVACUATION 
PLAN 

9.  MODIFICATIONS 
TO CIVIL DEFENCE 
APPROVED 
DRAWINGS 

Décor contractor shall coordinate with consultant to ensure that Emergency 
Evacuation Plan confirms to site conditions, furniture layout etc. 
Emergency Evacuation Plan shall comply with Chapter 5., Table 5.1.8. 

Any modifications on site, to construction or Fire and Life Safety systems or 
change of usage of the building, which are not as per Civil Defence approved 
drawings automatically invalidates the Civil Defence approved drawings. It is 
Décor contractor’s responsibility to make changes to approved drawings as 
per modifications on site and reapply to Civil Defence as “revised” for revi-
sion approvals. 

10. CODE                  

i. 

COMPLIANCE 

The overall code compliance of a fit-out work is complete responsibility of 
the Décor contractor. 

ii.  Approval from Civil Defence for any project drawings is based on minimum 
requirements and it does not relief Décor contractor from his responsibility 
to verify and explore additional code compliance requirements from latest 
edition of UAE Fire and Life Safety Code of Practice and The International 
Codes and Standards referred within. 

Décor contractor shall sign off final handing over documents to the owner, 
undertaking that all the Fire and Life Safety aspect of the fit-out work are as 
per approved drawings and are in full compliance with UAE Fire and Life 
Safety Code of Practice. 
This signed undertaking conformity from Décor contractor shall be sub-
mitted to Civil Defence along with final inspection, testing and handing over 
documents for Civil Defence NOC. 

11. FINAL SIGN OFF 

i. 

ii. 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1186 of 1348 

2.8.  House of Expertise Responsibilities  

2.8.1.  House of Expertise shall perform his responsibilities as per Table 18.6. 
 

Table 18.6.: House of Expertise Responsibilities 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  ENGINEERS 

i.  House of Expertise category is subdivided into,                                                               

a. House of Expertise for Fire and Life Safety in buildings and establishments.                                                                              
b. House of Expertise for Fire Safety of fuel Gas networks.                                                                    
c. House of Expertise for Fire Safety of Hazardous Materials.                                                                          

ii.  House of Expertise shall have qualified and experienced fire engineers, who are 

well verse in the Fire and Life Safety as per the scope of their license. 

iii.  Such Fire engineers shall be well verse with the latest edition of UAE Fire and Life 

Safety Code of Practice. 

iv.  House of Expertise shall be registered, licensed and approved by individual Emir-

ates’ Civil Defence. 

v.  House of Expertise engineers shall be licensed by Civil Defence, based on their 

qualifications, experience, training certificates and written examinations. 

vi.  Fire and Life Safety Engineers, along with written examinations, shall also have 

practical tests of reviewing and assessing projects. 

vii.  Each engineer must pass Civil Defence examinations, in their respective chosen 

fields as mentioned in Table 18.6.a. with minimum score of 80 marks out of 100. 

viii. Required House of Expertise engineers, in their respective fields shall be as per 

applicable decrees and regulations. 

ix.  It is House of Expertise’ responsibility to inform and take permission from Civil De-

fence to execute their scope of work, when Civil Defence approved and licensed 
engineers from the organization leave the organization.  It is House of Expertise 
responsibility, to hire new qualified engineers for Civil Defence registration within 
45 days of such permission granted by Civil Defence. 

x.  Additional certifications to the organization such as ISO/IEC 17020, IAS AC 291, IAS 

AC 98 or additional qualifications of engineers such as Professional Engineer (PE) 
or chartered engineer are added value to House of Expertise. 

xi.  However, these requirements are subjected to change in laws and policies as per 

decree 505, of Civil Defence. It is House of expertise responsibility to verify the 
requirements with Civil Defence. 

2.  SCOPE OF 

WORK 

1.  HOUSE OF EXPERTISE FOR FIRE AND LIFE SAFETY 
 
i.  House of Expertise are approved and licensed by Civil Defence to deliver expertise 
in Fire and Life Safety as counselor, advisor or expert, where hired by owners, lead 
consultants, contractors and insurance companies.  

ii.  House of expertise for Fire and Life safety scope of work and proficiency shall be                                                                               

a. Fire and Life Safety design drawings and reports.                                                                         
b. Fire Protection and Suppression System design, inspection and evaluation.              
c. Fire Detection and alarm system and Voice Alarm System design, inspection and 
evaluation.                                                                                                                                                 
d. Emergency Lighting and sign system design, inspection and evaluation.               
e. Risk assessment of new and existing facilities.                                                                              
f. Preparation of Emergency Action Plans and procedures. 

iii.  House of expertise for Fire and Life safety shall have manpower in accordance 

with applicable decrees and regulations. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1187 of 1348 

Table 18.6.: House of Expertise Responsibilities 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

2.  SCOPE OF WORK  2.  HOUSE OF EXPERTISE FOR FUEL GAS NETWORK SYSTEMS 

 
i.  House of Expertise are approved and licensed by Civil Defence to deliver ex-
pertise in Fuel gas systems as counselor, advisor or expert, where hired by 
owners, lead consultants, contractors and insurance companies.  

ii.  House of expertise for LPG systems scope of work and proficiency shall be                                                                               

a. Fuel gas System design, inspection and evaluation.                                          
b. Risk assessment of new and existing fuel gas systems and facilities.   

iii.  House of expertise for LPG systems shall have manpower in accordance with 

applicable decrees and regulations. 

 
3.  HOUSE OF EXPERTISE FOR HAZARDOUS MATERIAL 
 
i.  House of Expertise are approved and licensed by Civil Defence to deliver ex-

pertise in Hazardous material fire safety as counselor, advisor or expert, 
where hired by owners, lead consultants, contractors and insurance compa-
nies.  

ii.  House of expertise for Hazardous materials scope of work and proficiency 

shall be                                                                                                                                               
a. Risk assessment and fire safety of hazardous material.        

iii.  House of expertise for hazardous material shall have manpower in accord-

ance with applicable decrees and regulations. 

                   
                                      

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1188 of 1348 

Table 18.6.: House of Expertise Responsibilities 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

3. RESPONSIBILITIES  1.  APPROVALS 

 
i.  House of Expertise are not authorized to create and submit approval applica-
tions to Civil Defence. They shall perform their responsibilities through main 
consultant or Décor contractor. 

ii.  House of Expertise are not authorized to submit Risk assessment reports, 
Cladding reposts, Fire stopping reports, CFD reports or Inspection reports 
directly to Civil Defence. All submissions shall be through consultants. 

iii.  Where appointed by consultants or décor contractors to prepare Fire and Life 

Safety drawings, it is House of Expertise’ responsibility and scope of work to 
comply in full to the following.                                                                                                    
a. Drawings prepared by House of Expertise shall comply with “Drawing Sub-
mission” requirements as per Annexure 2. Drawing Submission Require-
ments. Non compliance with “Drawing Submission” requirements such as 
colour coding, inappropriate occupancy selection, drawings without scale etc. 
shall be fined to House of Expertise.                                                                                 
b. House of Expertise submissions through consultant shall be complete with 
occupancy risk assessments, occupant load calculations, code references, 
evaluations and justifications in a professional manner.                                                                                                          
c. Where risk assessment is scope of work, House of Expertise shall comply 
with Chapter 17. RA Studies.                                                                                            
d. Where installation assessment is scope of work, House of Expertise shall 
evaluate design, installation methods, products and manufacturer’s test cer-
tificates’ compliance with latest edition of UAE Fire and Life Safety Code of 
Practice requirements.                                                                                                                                      
e. House of Expertise shall review project and ensure code compliance thor-
oughly, in accordance with UAE Fire and Life Safety Code of Practice, before 
submitting to Civil Defence through consultant or décor contractors.                      
f. It is House of Expertise’ responsibility to highlight non compliances, if any, 
and insist on revisions to consultant’s proposals before approving consult-
ant’s project proposals to be submitted to Civil Defence.                                                  
g. House of Expertise shall stamp drawings as “reviewed and approved” be-
fore submitting to Civil Defence through consultant.                                                                                                                                                                         
h. Where design drawings are prepared, assessed and endorsed by House of 
Expertise, they shall be held responsible, when non compliant proposals from 
consultant are submitted to Civil Defence. Resubmissions bearing the review 
and approval stamp of the House of Expertise without rectifying the drawings 
and revising the project as per Civil Defence recommendations and com-
ments will be fined to House of Expertise.                                                                                
i. It is House of Expertise responsibilities to join the consultant, where 
meetings with Civil Defence are initiated. 

 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1189 of 1348 

 

Table 18.6.: House of Expertise Responsibilities 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

3. RESPONSIBILITIES  c.    House of Expertise shall ensure that commissioning of Fire and Life safety 

aspect of the building shall be in whole and not part by part or in phases, un-
less Civil Defence inspection team consent is obtained. 

d.    House of Expertise shall involve owner, owner’s representatives, owner ap-
pointed facility management for the acceptance test and acceptance test re-
ports shall be signed by all parties jointly. 

e.    It is House of Expertise’ duty to ensure that all fire and Life safety systems 

are functioning as approved and intended. 

f.     House of Expertise shall verify that Means of egress components such as 

Doors, Stairs and exits are as per acceptance criteria of Chapter 3. Section 6. 
g.     House of Expertise shall verify that Fire extinguishers are as per acceptance  

criteria of Chapter 4. Table 4.4.1. and Manufacturer’s instructions. 

h.    House of Expertise shall verify that Exit Signs are acceptable as per Chapter 

5, Section 4. and Manufacturer’s instructions. 

i.     House of Expertise shall verify that Emergency Lighting system is acceptable 

as per Chapter 6, Section 6. and Manufacturer’s instructions. 

j.     House of Expertise shall verify that Voice evacuation system, if any, is ac-

ceptable as per Chapter 7, Section 4. and Manufacturer’s instructions. 

k.     House of Expertise shall verify that Fire Detection and Alarm system is ac-
ceptable as per Chapter 8, Section 5.5. and Manufacturer’s instructions. 

l.     House of Expertise shall verify that Fire Protection systems are acceptable as 

per Chapter 9, Section 5. and Manufacturer’s instructions. 

m.   House of Expertise shall verify that Smoke Control System, if any, is accepta-

ble as per Chapter 10, Section 5 and Manufacturer’s instructions. 

n.    House of Expertise shall verify that LPG system, if any, is acceptable as per 

Chapter 11, Section 5. and Manufacturer’s instructions. 

o.  House of Expertise  shall verify that Kitchen hood Suppression Systems, if 

any, is accepted as per Manufacturer’s instructions. 

p.  House of Expertise appointed to inspect the Fire stopping Systems, shall co-

ordinate with consultant to arrange for progressive inspections during instal-
lations and shall be inspected at each stage of the installation process, before 
the fire stopping systems are concealed. Fire stopping systems shall be in-
spected as per Chapter 1. Section 3.3 and Section 3.4. 

 
2.  INSPECTIONS    
 
i.  Where appointed by Owners, consultants or décor contractors to conduct 
inspections of Fire and Life Safety aspects of the project, it is House of Ex-
pertise’ responsibility to comply to the following, as applicable, within the 
extent of their scope of contract.                                                                                                                                                
a. It is House of Expertise duty to ensure that contractors perform pre-
commissioning inspection and testing to confirm the readiness of the build-
ing for final inspection and commissioning, before inviting Civil Defence team 
for inspection.                                                                                                                             
b. House of Expertise shall inspect and verify each and every aspect of Fire 
and Life Safety features of the building and shall document the same.                                                                                             

 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1190 of 1348 

Table 18.6.: House of Expertise Responsibilities 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

3. RESPONSIBILITIES 

3.  REPORTS    
 
i.  Where House of Expertise are appointed by consultants to evaluate Clad-

ding Systems, full installation methods, material specifications, product and 
system test certifications, installer’s qualifications etc. shall be evaluated 
for compliance in accordance with UAE Fire and Life Safety Code of Prac-
tice, and submitted to Civil Defence through consultant, only when cladding 
systems are complaint. Non Compliant cladding systems shall not be sub-
mitted to Civil Defence. 

ii.  Where House of Expertise are appointed by consultant to evaluate Smoke 
Control Systems, full design criteria, CFD analysis, if any, design intent, ma-
terial specifications, product and system test certifications, installer’s quali-
fications etc. shall be evaluated for compliance in accordance with UAE Fire 
and Life Safety Code of Practice, and submitted to Civil Defence through 
consultant, only when smoke control systems are complaint. Non Compli-
ant smoke control systems shall not be submitted to Civil Defence. 

4. CODE COMPLIANCE 

i. 

The overall code compliance evaluation of the project is primary responsi-
bility of the House of Expertise, when appointed to do so.  

ii.  Approval from Civil Defence for any project drawings is based on minimum 

requirements and it does not relief consultant or House of Expertise from 
his responsibility to verify and explore additional code compliance require-
ments from UAE Fire and Life Safety Code of Practice and The Interna-
tional Codes and Standards referred within. 

iii.  Though performance based designs from House of Expertise are accepta-
ble, t is House of Expertise’ responsibility not to compromise the Fire and 
Life Safety aspects of the project or the intent of the requirements of pre-
scriptive codes while having “Performance Based Design” approaches or 
conducting “Engineering Judgments”. 

i.  Where appointed by consultants or Décor contractors, House of Expertise 
shall sign off final Fire and Life Safety evaluation and inspection documents 
to the owner, undertaking that all the Fire and Life Safety aspect of the 
building are as per approved drawings and are in full compliance with UAE 
Fire and Life Safety Code of Practice. 
This signed undertaking conformity from House of Expertise shall be sub-
mitted to Civil Defence along with final inspection, testing and handing 
over documents for Civil Defence completion certificate to occupy the 
building. 

ii. 

5. FINAL SIGN OFF 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1191 of 1348 

2.9.  Local Manufacturer’s Responsibilities  

2.9.1.  Local Manufacturing Companies shall perform their responsibilities as per Table 

18.7. 

Table 18.7.: Local Manufacturer’s Responsibilities 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  APPROVALS 

i. 

It is local manufacturer’s responsibility to apply to individual Emirates’ Civil 
Defence to register the factory and his fire and life safety materials, devices, 
equipment, systems and products. 

ii.  Manufacturers shall not sell any material, product or systems without Civil 

iii. 

iv. 

Defence approval and registration. 
It is local manufacturer’s responsibility to identify and understand that regis-
tration and approval in one emirates of UAE, does not automatically pro-
vides right to sell in other emirates of UAE. It is manufacturer’s responsibility 
to verify and comply with laws, decrees and regulations of Civil Defence. 
It is local manufacturer’s responsibility to understand the requirements of 
Table 18.7.9.  

2. ASSEMBLING 

i.  Assembling, repackaging, relabeling, re-aligning etc.  shall not be acceptable 

as manufacturing and shall not be registered by Civil Defence as 
“manufacturers”.  

ii.  Where, manufacturer has outsourced part of his work, activity, process of 

manufacturing to other parties through subcontracting, the “manufacturer” 
shall be responsible and accountable for subcontractor’s quality, control, 
conformity, certifications and management. 

3. MATERIAL TESTS 

i. 

ii. 

It is manufacturer’s responsibility to test all their material, product or sys-
tems, only through Civil Defence registered and approved Material Test La-
boratories. 
It is manufacturer’s responsibility to obtain test certifications for all their ma-
terial, product or systems, only through Civil Defence registered and ap-
proved Certification Bodies.  

iii.  It is manufacturer’s responsibility to understand that material test reports 
alone, without certificate of conformity (COC) from Civil Defence approved 
certification body, is not valid. 

v. 

iv.  It is manufacturer’s responsibility to understand that materials, products and 
systems tested in his own premises,  in-house laboratories or in-house work-
shops are not acceptable, unless evaluated and approved by Civil Defence. 
It is manufacturer’s responsibility to revise the conformity for his material, 
product or systems where modifications and alterations to design, compo-
nents, compositions, performance criteria have been executed. Any changes 
to his material, product or systems arising from such actions, invalidates the 
existing test reports, existing test certificates and existing Civil Defence ap-
provals. 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1192 of 1348 

 

Table 18.7.: Local Manufacturer’s Responsibilities 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

4. TEST STANDARDS 

i. 

It is manufacturer’s responsibility to identify and understand  the required 
test standards for their materials, products or systems, as per UAE Fire and 
Life Safety Code of Practice. 

ii.  Required test standards might revise or change as per the laws, policies and 
code revision requirements of the Civil Defence and international codes and 
standards amendments. And it is manufacturer’s responsibility to verify the 
required test standards, periodically, before registration renewal with Civil 
Defence. 

iii.  It is manufacture's responsibility to verify the latest edition of test standards,  

before approaching material test laboratories for any tests. 

iv.  Materials, products or systems tested with older editions of test standards 

shall not be acceptable to Civil Defence. 

5.  CIRTIFICATE OF 

i. 

CONFIRMITY 

ii. 

It is manufacturer’s responsibility to produce “Certificate of Conformity” for 
their material, product or systems to Civil Defence in a required format as 
per Civil Defence requirement to be registered and licensed. 
The certificate of compliance shall clearly state the following.                                        
a. Name, address, phone and fax numbers of manufacturer.                                          
b. Country of origin of the manufacturer.                                                                               
c. Name, location, address, phone and fax numbers of the factory.                               
d. Brand name                                                                                                                             
e. Logo on the product                                                                                                                   
f. Laboratory name and address, where test was conducted.                                          
g. Test standards, the test was conducted to.                                                                         
h. Test Certification body name and address.                                                                           
i. Test Certificate number.                                                                                                        
j. Validity Date. 

6. CROSS LISTING 

i. 

ii. 

It is manufacturer’s responsibility to understand that “cross listing” is not 
acceptable to Civil Defence. Please see this chapter’s Section 1.2.17.  “Cross 
listing” definition. 
Each manufacturer has to obtain his individual certificate of conformity, 
based on his material, product or system for his factory, under his name. 

7. MULTIPLE LISTING 

i.  Multiple listing shall be permitted by Civil Defence. Please see this chapter’s 

ii. 

Section 1.2.18.  “Multiple listing” definition. 
It is manufacturer’s responsibility to understand that “Multiple Listing” is 
acceptable to Civil Defence, provided that the primary manufacturer’s 
name, location o f factory, address and name of the secondary brand are 
mentioned in the certificate of conformity. 

8.  SPECIFICATIONS 
AND MANUALS 

i. 

ii. 

It is manufacturer’s responsibility to provide technical specifications, oper-
ating environmental conditions, end application, user manuals, operating 
manuals, installation guidelines, specific maintenance manuals and required 
schematics, along with their material, product or systems. 
It is manufacturer’s responsibility to provide warnings, safety precautions, 
user cautions, inapplicability, non suitability, expiry duration, if any, and 
such information in a clear documentation to the end user. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1193 of 1348 

Table 18.7.: Local Manufacturer’s Responsibilities 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

9. PROSECUTION 

i. 

It is manufacturer’s responsibility not to sell any material, product or sys-
tem, with respect to Fire and Life Safety Systems in UAE, that is not listed, 
not registered and not valid by Civil Defence, in accordance with the latest 
edition of UAE Fire and Life Safety Code of Practice. 

ii.  Violence of the requirement of Table 18.7.9.i., shall hold manufacturer as 

iii. 

responsible and it is punishable by law.  
It is manufacturer’s responsibility to abide by the requirement of Table 
18.7.9.i., irrespective of “Market Demand and Supply” circumstances.  

10. WARRANTY 

i. 

The Fire and Life Safety products and systems manufactured, supplied and 
installed in UAE shall ensure the availability of spare parts, compatibility 
with upgraded parts, components, systems, software and hardware such 
that the continuity of Fire and Life Safety systems’ functionality is ensured 
by upgrading without replacing or discarding the entire system in totality. 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1194 of 1348 

2.10.  Agent’s Responsibilities  

2.10.1.  Agents shall perform their responsibilities as per Table 18.8. 
 

Table 18.8.: Agent’s Responsibilities 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  REGISTRATION 

i. 

It is Agent’s responsibility to apply to Civil Defence to register the company 
and products he represents. 

ii.  Agents shall not sell any material, product or systems without Civil Defence 

iii. 

approval and registration. 
It is agent’s responsibility to identify and understand that registration and 
approval in one emirates of UAE, does not automatically provides right to 
sell in other emirates of UAE. It is agent’s responsibility to verify and comply 
with requirements and policies of each emirates and their registration pro-
cess. 

iv.  Agent shall produce exclusive “Agency” contract with the manufacturer for 
documentation, along with full credentials of the manufacturer to be regis-
tered with Civil Defence. 
It is agent’s responsibility to understand the requirements of Table 18.8. 
and sign off an undertaking letter to Civil Defence as documentation for reg-
istration. 

v. 

i.  Agents shall have qualified and experienced engineers, who are well verse in 
their respective Fire and Life Safety Systems’ Design, Installation and Inspec-
tion. 

ii.  Agent engineers and technicians shall be well verse with latest edition of UAE 

Fire and Life Safety Code of Practice. 

iii.  Agent engineers and technicians shall have valid training certificates from 

respective system and product manufacturers. 

iv.  Agent engineers and technicians shall be licensed by Civil Defence, based on 

their qualifications, training certificates and written examinations. 

v.  Each engineer must pass Civil Defence examinations, in their respective cho-

sen fields as per required passing marks. 

vii.  Each technician must pass Civil Defence examinations, in their respective 

chosen fields as per required passing marks. 

viii. Required number of engineers and technicians shall be as per Table 18.8.a. 
ix.   However, these requirements are subject to changes in applicable laws, de-

crees and regulations of Civil Defence. It is Installation and Maintenance com-
pany’s responsibility to verify the requirements with Civil Defence.  

2.  MANPOWER 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1195 of 1348 

 

Table 18.8.: Agent’s Responsibilities 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

3.  CONTRACTS 

i.  Agent is responsible to include in his legal contract documents with Insur-

ance companies, Owners, Consultants, Installation and maintenance Contrac-
tors, Manufacturers, Suppliers, Professionals and Facility management com-
panies that “Fire and Life Safety Requirements from Civil Defence shall be 
strictly followed as per latest edition of UAE Fire and Life Safety Code of 
Practice, and other rules and regulations from Civil Defence.” 
It is agent’s responsibility to evaluate manufacturers and suppliers qualifica-
tions and valid approval for products and company registration from Civil De-
fence, before placing order for products and making any agreement with 
them. 

ii. 

iii.  It is agent’s responsibility to ensure that contract documents clearly state 
that “All the materials relevant to Fire and Life Safety, shall be approved 
and listed by individual Emirates’ Civil Defence.”. 

iv.  It is agent’s responsibility to verify material test certificates and specifications 
in accordance with latest edition of UAE Fire and Life Safety Code of Practice. 

4.  SCOPE OF WORK 

i.  Agents, once registered and approved by Civil Defence, are authorized to sell 

only the products they represent. 

ii.  Agents must qualify with their number of required manpower. 
iii.  It is the responsibility of the agent to understand that without required man-

power as per applicable decrees and regulations they are not allowed to 
work in categories of buildings they are not qualified to. 

5. ASSEMBLING 

i.  Assembling parts imported or procured from manufacturers, repackaging, 

ii. 

relabeling, re-aligning etc.  shall not be acceptable as agent’s scope of work 
and shall not be registered with Civil Defence as “agents”.  
It is agent’s responsibility to represent the manufacturer’s materials, prod-
ucts and systems such that, which when installed, readily serve as Fire and 
Life Safety products, without assembling, adjusting, re-aligning, re-casing, re-
programming, re-wiring or any of such process. 

6. MATERIAL TESTS 

i. 

ii. 

It is not agent’s responsibility to test products, materials or systems, and not 
acceptable to Civil Defence that agents test materials, products or systems 
on behalf of manufacturers. 
It is not agent’s responsibility to obtain test certification for products, materi-
als or systems, and test certifications for materials, products or systems in 
agent’s name are not acceptable to Civil Defence for registration.  

iii.  It is agent’s responsibility to identify and understand the test requirements 

for materials, products and systems in accordance with latest edition of UAE 
Fire and Life Safety Code of Practice, before evaluating or representing man-
ufacturer in the UAE. 

iv.  It is agent’s responsibility to coordinate and insist the manufacturer to revise 
the conformity for his material, product or systems where modifications and 
alterations to design, components, compositions, performance criteria have 
been executed.  
It is the responsibility of agent to understand that any changes to material, 
product or systems arising from actions such as alterations to design, compo-
nents, compositions, performance criteria etc., invalidates the existing test 
reports, existing test certificates and existing Civil Defence approvals. 

v. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1196 of 1348 

 

Table 18.8.: Agent’s Responsibilities 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

7.  SPECIFICATIONS 
AND MANUALS 

i. 

ii. 

8. PROSECUTION 

i. 

It is agent’s responsibility to provide manufacturer’s technical specifications, 
operating environmental conditions, end application, user manuals, oper-
ating manuals, installation guidelines, specific maintenance manuals and 
required schematics, along with their material, product or systems. 
It is agent’s responsibility to provide manufacturer’s warnings, safety pre-
cautions, user cautions, inapplicability, non suitability, expiry duration, if 
any, and such information in a clear documentation to the end user. 

It is agent’s responsibility not to sell any material, product or system, with 
respect to Fire and Life Safety Systems in UAE, that is not listed, not regis-
tered and not valid by Civil Defence, in accordance with the latest edition of 
UAE Fire and Life Safety Code of Practice. 

ii.  Violence of the requirement of Table 18.8.8.i., shall hold agent as responsi-

iii. 

i. 

ble and it is punishable by law.  
It is agent’s responsibility to abide by the requirement of Table 18.8.8.i., 
irrespective of “Market Demand and Supply” circumstances.  

The Fire and Life Safety products and systems manufactured, supplied and 
installed in UAE shall ensure the availability of spare parts, compatibility 
with upgraded parts, components, systems, software and hardware such 
that the continuity of Fire and Life Safety systems’ functionality is ensured 
by upgrading without replacing or discarding the entire system in totality. 

9. WARRANTY 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1197 of 1348 

2.11.  Testing Laboratory Responsibilities  

2.11.1.  Testing Laboratory shall perform their responsibilities as per Table 18.9. 
 

Table 18.9.: Testing Laboratory Responsibilities 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  REGISTRATION 

i. 

ii. 

iii. 

It is laboratory’s responsibility to apply to Civil Defence to register the com-
pany and the list of accredited tests relevant to Fire and Life Safety Systems. 
Laboratory shall not test any material, product or systems intended for Civil 
Defence Approval with respect to Fire and Life Safety Systems, without Civil 
Defence approval and registration. 
It is laboratory’s responsibility to comply to requirements of Table 18.9. and 
sign off an undertaking letter to Civil Defence as documentation for registra-
tion. 

2.  QUALIFICATION 

Laboratory shall be accredited by the international accreditation bodies. 

i. 
ii.  Laboratory shall have valid ISO 17025 accreditation, general requirements for 

the competence of testing and calibration laboratories. 

iii.  Where Laboratory is also involved in inspections, such laboratory shall have 
valid ISO 17020 accreditation, conformity assessment-requirements for the 
operation of various types of bodies performing inspection. 

iv.  It is laboratory responsibility to be in full compliance with the accreditation 
schemes mentioned above with up to date auditing reports available to Civil 
Defence, regarding the organization management, staff qualification, test doc-
umentation, calibration of equipment and instrumentation, Health and Safety 
of the work environment etc. 

v.  Laboratory shall have a confidential directory website in English, where all the 

test reports performed at Laboratory, intended for Civil Defence approval, 
shall be documented, such that Civil Defence is permitted with confidential 
access to be able to search the data base by report summaries, products, 
companies and test standards. 

vi.  Laboratories shall have valid and approved environmental protection and 

management program which addresses the laboratory responsibility towards 
environmental impact s of the fire testing activities. 

3. SCOPE OF WORK 

i. 

Laboratory shall only conduct the tests that they are accredited for, if it is to 
be acceptable for Civil Defence. It is laboratory responsibility not to issue any 
reports to customers, for the tests that the laboratory is not accredited for, if 
customer is seeking Civil Defence approval. 

ii.  Laboratory shall perform tests in full, in accordance with test standards, they 

are accredited for. Partial tests shall not be conducted, where Civil Defence 
approval is customer’s intent. 

iii.  However, unaccredited tests, research and development tests, partial tests 
and modified tests for institutions, R&D bodies or in-house experimentation 
shall be permitted,  provided the reports issued for such tests clearly have the 
headline highlighting the purpose of tests as “For Research and Development 
Only” and such reports shall not be submitted for Civil Defence approvals. 

iv.  Test Laboratories shall be completely independent of the conformity certifica-

tion bodies, as management, as staff, as office and as signatory.  

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1198 of 1348 

 

Table 18.9.: Testing Laboratory Responsibilities 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

4.  ISO GUIDE 67 

i. 

The different certification systems covered in ISO Guide 67 are tabulated be-
low. But the one which has been adopted by Civil Defence is System 5. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1199 of 1348 

 

 

ITEMS 

Table 18.9.: Testing Laboratory Responsibilities 

REQUIREMENTS 

5. SCOPE OF 

i. 

WORK 

It is laboratory responsibility to be aware of the regulatory requirements, poli-
cies and test standards required by the Civil Defence in accordance with latest 
edition of UAE Fire and Life Safety Code of practice, for fire and life safety ma-
terials, products and systems.  

6. TEST               
STANDARDS 

7.  TEST REPORTS 

vi.   It is laboratory responsibility to educate and inform the customer about the 

test standards required by the UAE Civil Defence for fire and life safety materi-
als, products and systems. 

i. 

It is laboratory responsibility to identify and understand the required test 
standards for fire and life safety materials, products or systems, as per UAE Fire 
and Life Safety Code of Practice. 

ii.  Required test standards might revise or change as per the laws, policies and 
code revision requirements of the Civil Defence and international codes and 
standards amendments. And it is laboratory responsibility to verify the required 
test standards, periodically. 

iii.  Test standards for testing shall be latest edition of the standard. Tests shall not 

be conducted with older edition of invalid standards. Laboratory shall be held 
responsible and accountable for such invalid test reports issued to customers. 
iv.  It is laboratory responsibility to be aware and up to date with test standards, 

revisions, amendments and corresponding required revisions to their test 
equipment, calibration and instrumentation. 

v.  Test standards shall be latest editions and shall be followed in full requirements 

regarding specimen specification, test equipment specifications, test criteria, 
performance criteria, instrumentation specifications etc. and tests shall not be 
modified or deviated from the test standards.  

i.  Test reports shall contain full information as per the test standards. Partial in-
formation, partial assessment and selective performance statements shall not 
be part of the test reports. 

ii.  Customer demands and requested information, deviating from test standard 
report information shall not be entertained. Laboratory shall be held responsi-
ble and accountable for such altered information on the reports. 

iii.  Test reports shall be in accordance with the “Civil Defence format” containing 

minimum information as Table 19.8.7.iv. as follows.  

iv.  The test reports shall clearly state the following.                                                      

a. Name, address, phone and fax numbers of manufacturer.                                          
b. Country of origin of the manufacturer.                                                                               
c. Name, location, address, phone and fax numbers of the factory.                               
d. Brand name                                                                                                                             
e. Logo on the product (Optional)                                                                                                                   
f. Laboratory name and address, where test was conducted.                                          
g. Test standards, test standard edition and full description of the test.                                                                         
h. Test report number.                                                                                                     
i. Validity Date (If Applicable) 

v.  Test reports shall not be issued to customers without stamp and signature of 

the responsible individual of the laboratory. 

8.  SUB                            

i.  Subcontracting laboratories or outsourced laboratories shall be Civil Defence 

CONTRACTING 

registered, listed and approved laboratories. 

ii.  Test laboratories shall be responsible and accountable for such outsourced ac-

tivities, staff, supervision. 

iii.  It is Laboratory responsibility to understand that all the requirements of    Table 

18.9. apply to the outsourced test laboratories. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1200 of 1348 

2.12.  Conformity Certification Or Conformity Assessment Body’s 

Responsibilities  

2.12.1.  Test Conformity Certification Body shall perform their responsibilities as per Table 

18.10. 

 

Table 18.10.: Conformity Assessment (Certification) Body Responsibilities 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  REGISTRATION 

i. 

It is Conformity Certification Body’s responsibility to apply to Civil Defence to 
be registered as approved laboratories and certification bodies, relevant to 
Fire and Life Safety Systems. 

ii.  Conformity Certification Body shall not issue test certifications to any materi-

iii. 

al, product or systems with respect to Fire and Life Safety Systems without 
Civil Defence approval and registration. 
It is Conformity Certification Body’s responsibility to comply to requirements 
of Table 18.10. and sign off an undertaking letter to Civil Defence as docu-
mentation for registration. 

2.  QUALIFICATION 

i.  Conformity Certification Body shall be accredited by the international accredi-

tation bodies. 

ii.  Conformity Certification Body shall have valid ISO 17065 certification, con-
formity assessment-requirements for bodies certifying products, processes 
and services as applicable. 

iii.  Conformity Certification Body shall have valid ISO 17020 certification, con-

formity assessment-requirements for the operation of various types of bodies 
performing inspection. 

iv.  Conformity Certification Body shall be in full compliance with the accreditation 

schemes mentioned above and up to date auditing reports available to Civil 
Defence, regarding the organization management, staff qualification, certifica-
tion documentation, etc. 

v.  Conformity Certification Body shall have a directory website in English, where 

all the test certifications and assessments performed at Laboratory shall be 
documented, such that Civil Defence is able to search the data base by prod-
ucts, companies and test standards. 

3. SCOPE OF WORK  i.  Conformity Certification Body shall be completely independent of the Test La-

ii. 

boratory, as management, as staff, as office and as signatory. 
It is Conformity Certification Body responsibility to be aware of the regulatory 
requirements, policies and test standards required by the Civil Defence in ac-
cordance with latest edition of UAE Fire and Life Safety Code of practice, for 
fire and life safety materials, products and systems.  

iii.  It is Conformity Certification Body responsibility to educate and inform the 

customer about the test standards required by the Civil Defence for fire and 
life safety materials, products and systems. 

iv.  It is Conformity Certification Body’s responsibility to issue test certifications in 

full compliance to their accreditation scheme requirement. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1201 of 1348 

 

 

ITEMS 

3. SCOPE OF 

WORK 

Table 18.10.: Conformity Assessment (Certification) Body Responsibilities 

REQUIREMENTS 

v.    It is Conformity Certification Body’s responsibility to be aware of the Civil De-

fence listed and registered laboratories, which is updated periodically. 

vi.   Conformity Certification Body shall not issue test certifications for the laborato-

ries that are not listed and registered by Civil Defence. 

vii.  Conformity Certification Body shall not issue any test certifications to Agents, 

Suppliers, distributors or resellers. 

viii. Conformity Certification Body shall issue certifications only to the manufactur-

ers. 

ix.   It is Conformity Certification Body’s responsibility to understand that assem-

bling, repackaging, realigning, reprogramming, labeling of materials, products 
and systems is not a manufacturing activity and certifications shall not be issued 
to such activities or companies. 

x.    It is Conformity Certification Body’s responsibility to inspect the manufacturer’s 
facility, production line, process line and perform auditing physically to confirm 
the authenticity of the production at the factory and that ongoing production is 
conducted under an effective quality management system and conforms exactly 
with what was tested. 

xi.   It is Conformity Certification Body’s responsibility not to issue test certifications 

for products that are not tested and reported by Civil Defence approved and 
listed test laboratories.  

4. TEST            

i. 

STANDARDS 

It is Conformity Certification Body’s responsibility to identify and understand the 
required test standards for fire and life safety materials, products or systems, as 
per UAE Fire and Life Safety Code of Practice. 

ii.  Required test standards might revise or change as per the laws, policies and 

code revision requirements of the Civil Defence and international code amend-
ments. And it is laboratory responsibility to verify the required test standards, 
periodically. 

iii.  It is Conformity Certification Body’s responsibility not to issue test certificates 
for test reports of tests conducted with older edition of test standards, unless 
clear assessment and undertaking is provided that extent of revisions in stand-
ards have no impact on the existing test reports of tests from older edition of 
standards. 

iv.  It is Conformity Certification Body’s responsibility to ensure that Test standards 

v. 

for testing are latest edition of the standard and customers are aware o fit. 
It is Conformity Certification Body’s responsibility not to issue test certifications 
for partial tests, partial test reports. Certifications shall only be issued to test 
reports for tests of materials, products or systems, conducted as per latest edi-
tions of standards following full requirements regarding specimen specification, 
test equipment specifications, test criteria, performance criteria, instrumenta-
tion specifications etc. and tests shall not be modified or deviated from the test 
standards.  

5.  CERTIFICATE 

i.  Test Certification shall only be to full system assemblies where required by UAE 

OF             
CONFIRMITY 

ii. 

Fire and Life Safety Code of Practice. Test certifications to components, parts, 
hardware, segments shall not be acceptable to Civil Defence, where full assem-
bly tests are required by the code. 
It is Conformity Certification Body’s responsibility to issue certificates which con-
tain full information as per the test standards. Partial information, partial assess-
ment and selective performance statements shall not be part of the certifica-
tion. 

iii.  Customer demands and requested information, deviating from test standard 
report information shall not be entertained by Conformity Certification Body. 
Conformity Certification Body shall be held responsible and accountable for such 
altered information on the reports or certification. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1202 of 1348 

Table 18.10.: Conformity Assessment (Certification) Body Responsibilities 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

5.  CERTIFICATE OF             

iv.   In addition to the Certification certificate and documentation, a Certificate of 

CONFIRMITY 

Conformity (CoC), in accordance with the “Civil Defence format” , shall be 
issued.  

v.    The certificate of conformity shall clearly state the following.                                        
a. Name, address, phone and fax numbers of manufacturer.                                          
b. Country of origin of the manufacturer.                                                                               
c. Name, location, address, phone and fax numbers of the factory.                               
d. Name, location, address, phone and fax numbers of the Certification Body.                               
e. Test Certificate Number                                                                                                       
f. Brand name                                                                                                                             
g. Logo on the product                                                                                                                   
h. Model Number of the product.                                                                                           
i. Laboratory name and address, where test was conducted.                                          
j. Test standards, test standard edition and full description of the test.                                                                         
k. Test report number.                                                                                                         
l. Validity Date.                                                                                                                                 
m. The Pass criteria of the test standard, if any.                                                                   
n. Fire Performance criteria, if any.                                                                                             
o. Category of Fire performance evaluation, if any.                                                                
p. End application, End use of the material, product or the system. 

vi.   Test Certifications or certificate of confirmity shall not be issued to customers 

without stamp and signature of the responsible individual of the Test Con-
formity Certification Body.                                               

6. CROSS LISTING 

i. 

It is Conformity Certification Body’s responsibility to understand that “cross 
listing” is not acceptable to Civil Defence. Please see this chapter’s Section 
1.2.17.  “Cross listing” definition. 

ii.  Conformity Certification Body shall not issue certification for cross listed ma-

terials, products or systems, it is validated with separate test from the sec-
ondary manufacturer, in his own name. 

7.  MULTIPLE          

i.  Multiple listing shall be permitted by Civil Defence. Please see this chapter’s 

LISTING 

ii. 

Section 1.2.18.  “Multiple listing” definition. 
It is Conformity Certification Body’s responsibility to understand that 
“Multiple Listing” is acceptable to Civil Defence, provided that the primary 
manufacturer’s name, location of factory, address and name of the second-
ary brand, logo and name of the secondary owner are mentioned in the Cer-
tificate of Conformity. 

8. ISO GUIDE 67 

i. 

The ISO Guide 67 procedure adopted by Civil Defence is System 5. Please 
see  Table 18.9.4. 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1203 of 1348 

2.13.  Facility Management Company Responsibilities  

2.13.1.  Facility Management Company responsibilities shall comply with Table 18.11. 

Table 18.11.: Facility Management Company Responsibilities 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  MAN-
POWER 

2.  RESPONSI-

BILITIES 

i.  10% of every facility management personnel appointed in a building, shall obtain 

training from Civil Defence, when initiated by Civil Defence. 

ii.  1 of such trained facility management personnel shall be designated as “Fire and 

Life Safety Manager” and shall take the responsibility of leading the entire team of 
facility management. 

iii.  It is facility management company responsibility to apply to Civil Defence formally 

for the training request, when initiated by Civil Defence. 

iv.  Such training by Civil Defence shall be with the basics of Fire and Life Safety aspects 
of the building, usage of fire extinguishers and routine daily visual inspections of the 
Fire and Life Safety Systems. 

v.  100% of facility management personnel shall be familiar with Fire extinguisher us-

age. 

vi.  Trained Facility Management company personnel shall be approved and licensed by 

Civil Defence. 

i.  Facility management personnel responsibilities, along with everyday routine house 

keeping, security and maintenance tasks, Fire and Life Safety duties shall comply with 
the Table 18.11.  

ii.  Facility management company shall appoint a manager in each facility to supervise 
the team and such manager shall be licensed by Civil Defence in accordance with Ta-
ble 18.11.1. 

iii. The facility manager shall clearly assign specific duties to his team members with re-

gard to Fire and Life Safety aspects of the facility.  

iv. It is Facility management company’s responsibility to realize their role in Fire and Life 

Safety of the facility is of very high importance.  

v.  It is facility management company’s responsibility to inform owner and maintenance 

companies, where abnormal conditions exist for Fire and Life Safety Systems in the 
building, including balcony and window railings. It is facility management company 
duty to ensure that corrective actions are immediately implemented by owner. 

3. PLANNING 

i.  It is facility management company’s responsibility to insist building owners to include 

the participation of facility management team in the building fire and life safety sys-
tems inspection, testing, commissioning and handing over. 

ii.  It is facility management company’s responsibility to get involved in familiarizing the 

facility Fire and Life Safety Systems. 

4.  EMERGEN-

CY             
ACTION 
PLAN 

 

i.  It is facility management company’s responsibility to familiarize themselves with 
building Emergency Action plans and understand their role as individuals and as a 
team. 

ii.  Facility management personnel shall clearly draft out their specific role, in accord-
ance with Chapter 19. Emergency Evacuation Procedures., such as but not limited 
to, as follows                                                                                                                                              
a. Assigning particular person to confirm fire alarm by actually verifying at the loca-
tion of the building.                                                                                                                   
b.  Assigning particular person to inform Civil Defence and coordinate with them 
when they arrive.                                                                                                                        
c. Assigning particular personnel to assist elderly and disabled to execute building 
evacuation smoothly.                                                                                                                
d. Assigning particular personnel or team to manage evacuation and leading evacu-
ees to designated assembly points.                                                                                        
e. Assigning particular team or personnel to evaluate and assess initial stages of fire 
and use extinguishers and hose reel system, if it is assessed as safe to do so.                                                                                                                                        
f. Assigning particular personnel to understand the elevator operation during emer-
gencies and who can manage elevator evacuation, if it is safe to do so. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1204 of 1348 

 

Table 18.11.: Facility Management Company Responsibilities 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

5.  STORAGE 

i. 

ii. 

It is facility management company’s responsibility to ensure that no flam-
mable, hazardous and dangerous material are not stored in the facility ex-
cept where it is permitted, in a designated place and specific quantity. 
It is facility management company’s responsibility to ensure that means of 
egress components such as doors, stairs, corridors and exits are not blocked 
by stored items, toys, sports items, exercise equipment, articles, boxes, cy-
cles, waste materials, items intended to be disposed, signboards, plants, 
decoration items, banners, advertisements, pet cages etc. It is facility man-
agement personnel duty to ensure that emergency exit routes are freely 
accessible at all times. 

iii.  It is facility management company’s responsibility to ensure that balconies 

are not used as storage space. Balcony storage item fires can spread to 
building facades and can be catastrophic. 

iv.  It is facility management company’s responsibility to monitor occupant’s 

storage practices and ensure safe storage habits are practiced. 

6.  FIRE                                  

EXTINGUISHERS 

i.  Fire Extinguishers are the most efficient first line of Defence during initial 
stages of fire and it is facility management company’s responsibility to fa-
miliarize the various types of extinguishers and their application on various 
types of fires, in accordance with chapter 4. Fire Extinguishers and periodic 
training. 
It is facility management company’s responsibility to visually inspect fire 
extinguishers every week for their normal working condition and pressure 
gauges. Where low pressure, damages, dents etc. are found, facility man-
agement shall immediately inform owner and maintenance company. 

ii. 

iii.  It is facility management company’s responsibility to ensure that extinguish-
ers are not obstructed and are placed securely as commissioned in designat-
ed location with appropriate signs. 

7.  FIRE DETECTION 

i. 

AND ALARM           
SYSTEM 

 

It is facility management company’s responsibility to visually inspect the 
Fire detection and alarm system everyday. 

ii.  Fire detection and Alarm control panel shall be visually inspected everyday 
for power “ON” condition, trouble signals, abnormal conditions, low battery 
conditions, damages etc. and bring to owner or owner’s representative’s 
attention immediately and take further action of informing responsible 
maintenance company. 

iii.  It is facility management company’s responsibility to visually check for de-

tectors normal working condition by verifying the blinking LED’s., accumula-
tion of dust, open wiring, damaged detectors etc. and bring the matter to 
owner’s attention immediately. 

iv.   It is facility management personnel responsibility to ensure that detectors 

v. 

and manual call points are free of obstruction. 
It is facility management company’s responsibility not to ignore any alarms 
on the Fire Detection and Alarm System. Any alarms shall be immediately 
verified by physically cross checking the location and confirming the alarm 
authenticity, before declaring it as “false alarm” or resetting the Fire Detec-
tion and Alarm System. 

vi.  Log of annual inspection and maintenance dates shall be maintained and 

followed up regularly with inspection and maintenance companies. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1205 of 1348 

 

Table 18.11.: Facility Management Company Responsibilities 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

8.  FIRE             

PROTECTION 
SYSTEMS 

i.  Fire Protection Systems such as Fire Hose Reels, Hydrants, Sprinkler Systems, 
Fire Pump Systems shall be visually inspected to ensure their normal working 
condition. 

ii.  Fire Pump room shall be inspected visually everyday to ensure that all valves 
are in normal position as commissioned and pressure gauges are reading nor-
mal pressures as commissioned. 

iii.  It is facility management company responsibility to ensure pump control panel 

is in normal working condition with power “ON”, without trouble signals, ab-
normal conditions, low battery conditions, damages etc. Any abnormal condi-
tion shall be brought to owner’s attention and maintenance companies shall be 
informed immediately. 

iv.  Pump room, piping shall be free of leakages. 
v.  Fire water tank shall be inspected every day to ensure “Fire Reserve” is always 

available. 

vi.  It is facility management company ‘s duty to ensure sprinklers, hydrants and 
hose reels are not blocked and are in good working condition without leaks, 
damages and tampering. 

vii.  It is facility management company ‘s duty to  visually inspect the fire protection 

systems to ensure nozzles, hose reels, and tools are not missing from the des-
ignated cabinets or location. 

9.  EMERGENCY 

i. 

LIGHTING AND 
SIGNS 

10.  EMERGENCY  
EVACUATION 
PLAN 

It is facility management company’s responsibility to visually inspect the Emer-
gency Lighting system control unit and luminaries everyday. 

ii.  Emergency Lighting control panel shall be visually inspected everyday for pow-

er “ON” condition, trouble signals, abnormal conditions, low battery condi-
tions, damages etc. and bring to owner or owner’s representative’s attention 
immediately and take further action of informing responsible maintenance 
company. 

iii.  It is facility management company’s responsibility to visually check for proper 

exit signs and ensure they represent actual direction of available exits. 

i. 

It is facility management company’s responsibility  verify emergency evacua-
tion plans and ensure that the building, furniture, artifact etc. arrangements 
have not altered the exit routes and exit access ways. 

ii.  Modifications in terms of partitions, demolitions, new arrangement of equip-
ment, relocations of doors, interior/exterior landscaping, interior décor and 
such activities in a building can alter the exit routes and direction of exit routes 
and emergency evacuation plans should be updated and verified accordingly. 

11. DRILLS 

i.  Facility management shall conduct emergency fire drills for their staff every 6 

months and whole facility management team shall actively participate in emer-
gency fire drill management. See Chapter 19. Section 4. 

ii.  The Fire and Life Safety manager, facility management and designated person-
nel shall practice emergency drills and their role without the entire occupancy 
evacuation, every month, where the efficiency of the emergency action plan 
and evaluation of their performance during fire, emergency, panic and danger-
ous situations to execute smooth evacuation of the occupants to safety of ex-
terior or point of safety shall be conducted and recorded for assessment. 

iii.  Short comings in emergency management, scope of improvement in smooth 

evacuation, occupants’ behavior during evacuation etc. shall be explored 
through the drills and improvisation measures shall be implemented by bring-
ing it to owner’s attention and coordination. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1206 of 1348 

2.14.  Assembly Occupancy Management Responsibilities  

2.14.1.  Assembly occupancy management responsibilities shall be as per Table 18.12. 

Table 18.12.: Assembly Occupancy Management Responsibilities 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

i. 
1.  FACILITY                   

MANAGEMENT 

It is Assembly occupancy management’s responsibility to ensure that their fa-
cility management company complies with the following requirement. 

ii.  Assembly occupancy facility management responsibilities shall comply with the 
full requirements of Table 18.11. Facility Management Company Responsibili-
ties. 

2.  CROWD                        

i.  Every assembly occupancy, including Theme Parks, Amusement Parks, Mall 

MANAGERS 

Play Areas, Food Courts, Bars, Discos, Night Clubs, Event Halls, Concert Halls, 
Exhibition Halls, Casinos, Stadiums, Theaters, Amphitheaters, Cinemas, Muse-
ums, Prayer Halls, Churches, Mosques etc. shall appoint or designate minimum 
of 2 Fire and Life Safety managers and 2 crowd managers, when initiated by 
Civil Defence. 

ii.  Where occupant load is more than 250 people, there shall be additional 1 

crowd manager for every 250 people, when initiated by Civil Defence. 

iii.  Crowd managers shall obtain training from Civil Defence and shall be certified 

and licensed by Civil Defence. 

iv.  It is assembly facility management’s responsibility to formally request Civil De-

fence for their crowd manager’s training, when initiated by Civil Defence. 

3.  CROWD                  

i.  Crowd manager shall have understanding of the Fire and Life Safety hazards 

ii.  Crowd manager shall be aware of the dangers and security hazards that can 

MANAGER’S               
RESPONSIBILI-
TIES 

involved in the area. 

endanger the public assembly. 

iii.  Crowd manager shall be fully aware of the facility or area exit routes, emergen-

cy evacuation plans and emergency evacuation strategies and procedures. 

iv.  Crowd managers shall be responsible to familiarize themselves with facility and 

area. Such areas can be permanent in nature or temporary and unpredictable 
arrangements such as in events or concerts. 

v.  Crowd managers shall have fair knowledge of Fire and Life Safety equipment 

and systems. 

vi.  Crowd managers shall be well verse with emergency reporting and coordi-

nating procedures. 

4.  FIRE AND LIFE 

i. 

SAFETY                  
MANAGER’S               
RESPONSIBILI-
TIES 

ii. 

It is Fire and Life Safety manager’s responsibility to monitor, record and ensure 
that facility management company executes their responsibilities professional-
ly in accordance with Table 18.11. Facility Management Company Responsibil-
ities. 
It is Fire and Life Safety manager’s responsibility coordinate with the Fire and 
Life safety managers, crowd managers and facility management team to pre-
pare a written Emergency Action Plan. 

iii.  Fire and Life Safety managers shall have understanding of the Fire and Life 

Safety hazards involved in the area. 

iv.  Fire and Life Safety manager shall be aware of the dangers and security hazards 

that can endanger the people safety. 

v.  Fire and Life Safety managers shall be fully aware of the facility or area exit 

routes, emergency evacuation plans and emergency evacuation strategies and 
procedures. 

vi.  Fire and Life Safety manager shall have fair knowledge of Fire and Life Safety 

equipment and systems in the facility. 

vii.  Fire and Life Safety manager shall be well versed with emergency reporting and 

 

coordinating with Civil Defence. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1207 of 1348 

 

Table 18.12.: Assembly Occupancy Management Responsibilities 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

5.  EMERGENCY             

i.  Assembly occupancy management shall coordinate with the Fire and Life safe-
ty managers, crowd managers and facility management team to prepare and 
maintain written Emergency Action Plan, where individuals duties and respons-
es during emergency situations is clearly mentioned and assigned.  

ACTION PLAN 

6.  DRILLS 

ii.  Assembly occupancy management personnel shall know their specific role such 

as but not limited to, as follows                                                                                                
a. Confirmation of fire alarm by physically verifying at the location of the build-
ing or area.                                                                                                                       
b.  Informing, reporting emergency incident to Civil Defence and coordinate 
with them when they arrive.                                                                                                                    
c. Assisting elderly and disabled to execute building evacuation smoothly.                                                                                                  
d. Coordination and planning with crowd manager to manage evacuation and 
leading evacuees to designated assembly points.                                                                                    
e. Evaluation and assessment of initial stages of fire and usage of extinguishers 
and hose reel system, if it is assessed as safe to do so.                                                                                                                                        
f. Understanding of the elevator operation during emergencies and managing 
elevator evacuation, if it is safe to do so. 

iii.   Where assembly occupancies are located in the high-rise portion of a building, 
the emergency action plan shall include egress procedures, methods, and pre-
ferred evacuation routes for each event considered to be a life safety hazard 
that could impact the building, including the appropriateness of the use of ele-
vators. 

iv.  For guideline on preparation of Emergency Action Plans and Emergency Drills, 

see Chapter 19. Emergency Evacuation Procedures.  

i.  Assembly occupancy management shall conduct emergency fire drills for their 
staff every 6 months and whole facility management team shall actively partici-
pate in emergency fire drill management. See Chapter 19. Section 4. 
It is assembly occupancy management’s responsibility to involve all the em-
ployees in emergency drills to familiarize their role and response to emergency 
situations. 

ii. 

iii.  Assembly occupancy employees, attendants, facility management team, super-

visor, crowd manager and all such designated personnel shall participate in 
emergency drills to explore the efficiency of the emergency action plan and to 
evaluate their performance during fire, emergency, panic and dangerous situa-
tions to execute smooth evacuation of the crowd to safety of exterior or point 
of safety. 

iv.  Drills shall not be required to involve general public of the assembly occupan-

cy. However, the time duration it takes for the occupants to fully reach the 
safety of exterior shall be evaluated and improvised. 

v.  Communication between the designated personnel, decision making, under-
standing of specific roles without hampering others assigned duties etc. shall 
be evaluated and recorded for assessment. 

vi.  Drills should be conducted only for employees and designated personnel of the 
assembly occupancy, without causing unnecessary panic and chaos among the 
uninformed and unsuspecting public crowd. 

7.  MAINTENANCE 

i. 

It is assembly occupancy management’s responsibility to ensure that facility 
management company inspect and maintain the seating, railing, guards, grand-
stands etc. used by public and crowd to ensure that the crowd is accident free 
and safe in using these features.  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1208 of 1348 

2.15.  Educational Occupancy Management Responsibilities  

2.15.1.  Educational occupancy management responsibilities shall be as per Table 18.13. 

Table 18.13.: Educational Occupancy Management Responsibilities 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  FACILITY                   

MANAGEMENT 

i. 

It is educational occupancy management’s responsibility to ensure that their 
facility management company complies with the following requirement. 
ii.  Educational occupancy facility management responsibilities shall comply 

with the full requirements of Table 18.11. Facility Management Company 
Responsibilities. 

2.  FIRE AND LIFE 

SAFETY                        
MANAGERS 

i.  Every Educational occupancy, including Schools, Nurseries, Universities, Tal-
ent grooming centers, Training centers etc. shall appoint or designate mini-
mum of 2 Fire and Life Safety Managers from their own management staff, 
when initiated by Civil Defence. 

ii.  Fire and Life Safety Managers shall obtain training from Civil Defence and 

shall be certified and licensed by Civil Defence. 

iii.  It is educational occupancy management’s responsibility to formally request 
Civil Defence for their fire and life safety manager’s training, when initiated 
by Civil Defence. 

3.  FIRE AND LIFE 

i. 

SAFETY                  
MANAGER’S               
RESPONSIBILITIES 

ii. 

It is Fire and Life Safety manager’s responsibility to monitor, record and en-
sure that facility management company executes their responsibilities pro-
fessionally in accordance with Table 18.11. Facility Management Company 
Responsibilities. 
It is Fire and Life Safety manager’s responsibility to coordinate between edu-
cational occupancy management, teachers, attendants and the facility man-
agement company to prepare a written Emergency Action Plan. 

iii.  Fire and Life Safety managers shall have understanding of the Fire and Life 

Safety hazards involved in the area. 

iv.  Fire and Life Safety manager shall be aware of the dangers and security haz-

ards that can endanger the students’ safety. 

v.  Fire and Life Safety managers shall be fully aware of the facility or area exit 
routes, emergency evacuation plans and emergency evacuation strategies 
and procedures. 

vi.  Fire and Life Safety manager shall have fair knowledge of Fire and Life Safety 

equipment and systems in the facility. 

vii.  Fire and Life Safety manager shall be well verse with emergency reporting 

and coordinating with Civil Defence. 

4.  EMERGENCY             

i.  Emergency action plan shall clearly draft out the duties of Fire and Life Safety 

ACTION PLAN 

manager’s, Principal’s, Teacher’s, attendant’s and facility management 
team’s respective duties and responses during fire and emergency situations. 
ii.  Designated personnel, as per written Emergency action plan shall be familiar 

with their specific role such as but not limited to, as follows                                                                                                
a. Confirmation of fire alarm by physically verifying at the location of the 
building or area before triggering evacuation alarm.                                                                                                           
b. Informing, reporting emergency incident to Civil Defence and coordinate 
with them when they arrive.                                                                                                                    
c. Assisting nursery, kindergarten and disabled children to execute building 
evacuation smoothly.                                                                                                  
d. Coordination and planning to manage evacuation and leading evacuees to 
designated assembly points.                                                                                     
e. Evaluation and assessment of initial stages of fire and usage of extinguish-
ers and hose reel system, if it is assessed as safe to do so.                                                                                                                                         

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1209 of 1348 

 

Table 18.13.: Educational Occupancy Management Responsibilities 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

4.  EMERGENCY             

ACTION PLAN 

iii.   Teachers, instructors and attendants shall actively take part in familiarizing 
themselves with written Emergency action plans and their role during emer-
gency situations. 

iv.  .  For guideline on preparation of Emergency Action Plans and Emergency 

Drills, see Chapter 19. Emergency Evacuation Procedures.  

5.  DRILLS 

i.  Emergency Drills shall be conducted once every 6 months for the entire ed-

ucational occupancy occupants with every occupant’s participation in 
smooth and full evacuation as per Emergency Action Plan. 

ii.  Such emergency drills shall be conducted with total evacuation alarm, trig-
gered by the “full evacuation alarm” button located at principal’s room, in 
accordance with Chapter 8. Fire Detection and Alarm System. 

iii.  Such emergency drill shall be conducted within 30 days of the commence-

ment of the new session. 

iv.  Drills shall emphasize on orderly and smooth evacuation of students, rather 

than speed, chaos and panic. 

v.  Great care should be taken to assist and protect the pre-school and nursery 

children during emergency drills for their safety from older students and 
injuries from stampedes. 

vi.  However, every month, the Fire and Life Safety manager, facility manage-
ment and designated personnel shall practice emergency drills and their 
role without the entire education occupancy evacuation, where the efficien-
cy of the emergency action plan and evaluation of their performance during 
fire, emergency, panic and dangerous situations to execute smooth evacua-
tion of the crowd to safety of exterior or point of safety shall be conducted 
and recorded for assessment. 

6.  TEACHERS AND 

i. 

STAFF                                 
RESPONSIBILITY 

ii. 

It shall be the duty of principals, teachers and staff to inspect all exit facili-
ties daily to ensure that all stairways, doors, corridors and other exits are in 
proper condition, free of blockages. 
It is teachers and staff duty to be aware of unsafe or dangerous situa-
tions arising from student’s ignorance and take corrective actions im-
mediately. 

iii.  It is teachers responsibility to observe fire safety and care in laborato-

ries while conducting experiments with open flame, flammable liq-
uids and electricity. 

iv.  Warning signs of the fire hazards of open flames, hazardous chemi-

cals and electrical fires shall be provided in the laboratories. 

v.  All teachers and staff shall be trained to use appropriate fire extin-

guishers. 

vi.  It is teachers and staff duty to immediately inform the Fire and Life 

Safety manager of the unsafe conditions in the facility , if any. 

vii.  It is teachers responsibility to educate students and create awareness 

of fire safety to ensure that students  implement the necessary pre-
cautions and practices of fire safety in their everyday lives. 

7.  MAINTENANCE 

i. 

It is Educational occupancy management’s responsibility to inspect and 
maintain the sports equipment, laboratory equipment, seating, railing, 
guards, stairs etc. used by students to ensure that the students are accident 
free and safe in using these features.  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1210 of 1348 

2.16.  Highrise Building Management Responsibilities  

2.16.1.  Every Highrise building management, irrespective of the type of occupancy, shall 

perform their responsibilities as per Table 18.14. 

Table 18.14.: Highrise Building Management Responsibilities 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  FACILITY                   

i. 

MANAGEMENT 

It is every Highrise building management’s responsibility to ensure that their 
facility management company complies with the following requirement. 

ii.  Highrise building’s facility management company shall comply with the full 
requirements of Table 18.11. Facility Management Company Responsibili-
ties. 

2.  FIRE AND LIFE 

SAFETY                        
MANAGERS 

i.  Every Highrise building facility management company shall appoint or desig-
nate minimum of 2 Fire and Life Safety Managers, when initiated by Civil De-
fence. 

ii.  Every Highrise building facility management company employees shall be 

trained in appropriate Fire extinguisher usage. 

iii.  Fire and Life Safety Managers shall obtain training from Civil Defence and 

shall be certified and licensed by Civil Defence. 

iv.  It is every Highrise building facility management’s responsibility to formally 
request Civil Defence for their fire and life safety manager’s training, when 
initiated by Civil Defence. 

3.  FIRE AND LIFE 

i. 

SAFETY                  
MANAGER’S               
RESPONSIBILITIES 

ii. 

It is Fire and Life Safety manager’s responsibility to monitor, record and en-
sure that facility management company executes their responsibilities pro-
fessionally in accordance with Table 18.11. Facility Management Company 
Responsibilities. 
It is Fire and Life Safety manager’s responsibility to prepare a written Emer-
gency Action Plan. For guidelines on preparation of Emergency Action Plans, 
see Chapter 19. Emergency Evacuation Procedures.  

iii.  Fire and Life Safety managers shall have understanding of the Fire and Life 

Safety hazards involved in the area. 

iv.  Fire and Life Safety manager shall be aware of the dangers and security haz-

ards that can endanger the occupant safety. 

v.  Fire and Life Safety managers shall be fully aware of the facility or area exit 
routes, emergency evacuation plans and emergency evacuation strategies 
and procedures. 

vi.  Fire and Life Safety manager shall have fair knowledge of Fire and Life Safety 

equipment and systems in the facility. 

vii.  Fire and Life Safety manager shall be fully aware of operation of Fire and Life 
Safety system controls, smoke control system controls, LPG/Natural gas sys-
tem controls and elevator system controls of the building. 

viii. Fire and Life Safety manager shall be well verse with emergency reporting 

and coordinating with Civil Defence. 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1211 of 1348 

Table 18.14.: Highrise Building Management Responsibilities 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

4.  EMERGENCY             

i.  Emergency action plan shall clearly draft out the duties of Fire and Life Safety 

ACTION PLAN 

manager’s and his facility management team’s respective assigned duties 
and responses during fire and emergency situations. 

ii.  Designated personnel, as per written Emergency action plan shall be familiar 

with their specific role such as but not limited to, as follows                                                                                                
a. Confirmation of fire alarm by physically verifying at the location of the 
building or area before triggering evacuation alarm.                                                                                                           
b. Informing, reporting emergency incident to Civil Defence and coordinate 
with them when they arrive.                                                                                                                    
c. Assisting children, elderly and physically challenged to execute building 
evacuation smoothly.                                                                                                  
d. Coordination and planning to manage evacuation and leading evacuees to 
designated assembly points.                                                                                     
e. Evaluation and assessment of initial stages of fire and usage of extinguish-
ers and hose reel system, if it is assessed as safe to do so.  

iii.   Where Highrise building elevator is part of evacuation component, it is Fire 

and Life Safety Manager’s responsibility to understand the operation and 
suitability of elevators to be used during emergency situations. A detailed 
procedure for the same shall be incorporated into the Emergency Action 
Plans.   

iv.  Evacuating an entire Highrise building is a complex and time consuming pro-
cedure. Emergency Action Plans shall address and incorporate phased evacu-
ation procedures, where floors in the immediate vicinity of fire accidents are 
evacuated to lower floors of safety and based on the assessment of situation, 
the upper floors evacuation follows and then the rest of the floors. 

v.   For guideline on preparation of Emergency Action Plans and Emergency 

Drills, see Chapter 19. Emergency Evacuation Procedures.  

                                                                                                                                       

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1212 of 1348 

Table 18.14.: Highrise Building Management Responsibilities 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  BUSINESS OCCUPANCY 
 
i.  Emergency Drills shall be conducted once every 6 months for the entire business 

occupancy occupants with every occupant’s participation in smooth and full 
evacuation as per Emergency Action Plan. 

ii.  Such emergency drills shall be conducted with total evacuation alarm, triggered 
by the “full evacuation alarm” in accordance with Chapter 8. Fire Detection and 
Alarm System. 

iii.  Every business occupancy tenant shall have a designated Fire and Life Safety vol-

unteer from his staff, who shall be responsible to coordinate with the facility 
management’s Fire and Life Safety manager to understand the emergency action 
plan. 

iv.  It is every business occupancy tenant’s responsibility to maintain such an emer-
gency action plan copy in his office and familiarize all the employees of orderly 
evacuation in coordination with his in-house Fire and Life Safety volunteer and 
the building facility Fire and Life Safety manager’s leadership. 

v.  Drills shall emphasize on orderly and smooth evacuation of occupants, rather 

than speed, chaos, panic and time frame. 

vi.  However, every month, the emergency drills procedures shall be practiced by the 

building’s Fire and Life Safety manager, facility management team and every 
business occupancy tenant’s designated volunteer, in accordance with Chapter 
18., Table 18.11. Facility Management Company Responsibilities. They shall 
practice their role without the entire occupancy evacuation, where the efficiency 
of the emergency action plan and evaluation of their performance during fire, 
emergency, panic and dangerous situations to execute smooth evacuation of the 
occupant’s to safety of exterior or point of safety shall be conducted and record-
ed for assessment. 

 
2.  HOTEL OCCUPANCY 
 
i.  Emergency Drills involving hotel guests shall not be required. However, the hotel 

staff shall perform their responsibility in accordance with Chapter 18., Table 
18.15. 

 
3.   RESIDENTIAL  OCCUPANCY 
 
i.  Emergency Drills involving Residents shall not be required. However, the building 

facility management shall perform their responsibility and drills in accordance 
with Chapter 18., Table 18.11. Facility Management Company Responsibilities. 
ii.  However, Emergency instructions, as per Emergency Action Plans, shall be provid-
ed annually to each dwelling unit to indicate the location of alarms, egress paths, 
and actions to be taken, both in response to a fire in the dwelling unit and in re-
sponse to the sounding of the building alarm system. 

5.  DRILLS 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1213 of 1348 

2.17.  Hotel Management Responsibilities  

2.17.1.  Every Hotel management, irrespective of the height of the building, shall perform 

their responsibilities as per Table 18.15. 

 

Table 18.15.: Hotel Management Responsibilities 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

i. 
1.  FACILITY                   

MANAGEMENT 

It is every Hotel management’s responsibility to ensure that their facility man-
agement company complies with the following requirement. 

ii.  Hotel building’s facility management company shall comply with the full re-

quirements of Table 18.11. Facility Management Company Responsibilities. 

2.  HOTEL               

EMERGENCY        
RESPONSE 
TEAM 

i.  Every Hotel management shall have “Emergency Response Team” consisting of 

trained professionals in Fire and Life Safety, security and first responders for 
emergency situations. 

ii.  Every Hotel Emergency Response Team shall consist of minimum of 2 Fire and 

Life Safety Managers from their own staff, when initiated by Civil Defence. 

iii.  Every Hotel employees shall be trained in appropriate Fire extinguisher usage. 
iv.  Fire and Life Safety Managers shall obtain training from Civil Defence and shall 

v. 

be certified and licensed by Civil Defence. 
It is every Hotel management’s responsibility to formally request Civil Defence 
for their fire and life safety manager’s training, when initiated by Civil Defence. 

3.  FIRE AND LIFE 

i. 

SAFETY                  
MANAGER’S               
RESPONSIBILI-
TIES 

ii. 

It is Fire and Life Safety manager’s responsibility to monitor, record and ensure 
that facility management company executes their responsibilities professionally 
in accordance with Table 18.11. Facility Management Company Responsibili-
ties. 
It is Fire and Life Safety manager’s responsibility to prepare a written Emergen-
cy Action Plan. For guidelines on preparation of Emergency Action Plans, see 
Chapter 19. Emergency Evacuation Procedures.  

iii.  Fire and Life Safety managers shall have understanding of the Fire and Life Safe-

ty hazards involved in the area. 

iv.  Fire and Life Safety manager shall be aware of the dangers and security hazards 

that can endanger the hotel guests’ safety. 

v.  Fire and Life Safety managers shall be fully aware of the facility or area exit 

routes, emergency evacuation plans and emergency evacuation strategies and 
procedures. 

vi.  Fire and Life Safety manager shall have fair knowledge of Fire and Life Safety 

equipment and systems in the facility. 

vii.  Fire and Life Safety manager shall be fully aware of operation of Fire and Life 

Safety system controls, smoke control system controls, LPG/Natural gas system 
controls and elevator system controls of the building. 

viii. Fire and Life Safety manager shall be well verse with emergency reporting and 

coordinating with Civil Defence. 

4.  EMERGENCY             

ACTION PLAN 

i.  Emergency action plan shall clearly draft out the duties of Fire and Life Safety 
manager’s, Emergency Response Team’s and facility management team’s re-
spective assigned duties and responses during fire and emergency situations. 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1214 of 1348 

Table 18.15.: Hotel Management Responsibilities 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

4.  EMERGENCY             

ii.    Designated personnel, as per written Emergency action plan shall be famil-

ACTION PLAN 

iar with their specific role such as but not limited to, as follows                                                                                                
a. Confirmation of fire alarm by physically verifying at the location of the 
building or area before triggering evacuation alarm.                                                                                                           
b. Informing, reporting emergency incident to Civil Defence and coordinate 
with them when they arrive.                                                                                                                    
c. Assisting children, elderly and physically challenged to execute Hotel 
evacuation smoothly.                                                                                                                   
d. Coordination and planning to manage evacuation and leading evacuees 
to designated assembly points.                                                                                          
e. Evaluation and assessment of initial stages of fire and usage of extinguish-
ers and hose reel system, if it is assessed as safe to do so.                                                                                                                                         

iii.   Every Highrise Hotel building elevator could be part of evacuation compo-
nent. It is Fire and Life Safety Manager’s responsibility to understand the 
operation and suitability of elevators to be used during emergency situa-
tions. A detailed procedure for the same shall be incorporated into the 
Emergency Action Plans.  

iv.  For guideline on preparation of Emergency Action Plans and Emergency 

Drills, see Chapter 19. Emergency Evacuation Procedures.  

i.  Every 6 months, the Emergency drills procedures shall be practiced by the 
Hotel Emergency Response Team, Fire and Life Safety manager and facility 
management team, in accordance with Chapter 18., Table 18.11. Facility 
Management Company Responsibilities. They shall practice their role with-
out the entire occupancy evacuation, where the efficiency of the emergency 
action plan and evaluation of their performance during fire, emergency, 
panic and dangerous situations to execute smooth evacuation of the guests 
to safety of exterior or point of safety shall be conducted and recorded for 
assessment. 

ii.  Emergency Response Team shall also practice the operation of First Aid 

equipment. 

iii.  The testing devices to alert guests in various locations such as guest rooms, 
gymnasium, swimming pools, restaurants etc. shall be tested and practiced.  

iv.  Drills shall emphasize on orderly and smooth evacuation of occupants, ra-

ther than speed, chaos, panic and time frame. 

i.  An Emergency Evacuation plan in accordance with Chapter 5. Table 5.1.8. 
depicting the actual floor arrangement, exit locations and room identifica-
tion shall be posted immediately adjacent to, every guest room door of the 
hotels and in every resident room in dormitories and hostels. 

ii.  Fire safety information in accordance with Emergency Action Plans and Ho-

tel Fire strategies shall be provided to allow guests to understand and fol-
low their role during Emergency Situations. 

5.  DRILLS 

6.  INSTRUCTIONS TO 

HOTEL GUESTS 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1215 of 1348 

2.18.  Healthcare Occupancy Management Responsibilities  

2.18.1.  Every Healthcare occupancy management, irrespective of the height of the building, 

shall perform their responsibilities as per Table 18.16. 

 

Table 18.16.: Healthcare Occupancy Management Responsibilities 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  FACILITY                   

i. 

MANAGE-
MENT 

It is every Healthcare occupancy management’s responsibility to ensure that their 
facility management company complies with the following requirement. 

ii.  Healthcare facility management company shall comply with the full requirements 

of Table 18.11. Facility Management Company Responsibilities. 

2.  HEALTHCARE               

EMERGENCY        
RESPONSE 
TEAM 

i.  Every Healthcare Administration shall have “Emergency Response Team” con-
sisting of trained professionals in Fire Safety, security and first responders for 
emergency situations. 

ii.  Such an Emergency Response Team shall involve healthcare staff from each spe-

cialized department and from each floor of the building. 

iii.  Every Healthcare Emergency Response Team shall consist of minimum of 2 Fire 
and Life Safety Managers from their own staff, when initiated by Civil Defence. 

iv.  Every member of healthcare Emergency Response Team shall be trained in appro-

priate Fire extinguisher usage. 

v.  Fire and Life Safety Managers shall obtain training from Civil Defence and shall be 

certified and licensed by Civil Defence. 

vi.  It is every Healthcare occupancy management’s responsibility to formally request 

Civil Defence for their fire and life safety manager’s training, when initiated by 
Civil Defence. 

3.  FIRE AND 

i. 

LIFE SAFETY                  
MANAGER’S               
RESPONSI-
BILITIES 

ii. 

It is Fire and Life Safety manager’s responsibility to monitor, record and ensure 
that facility management company executes their responsibilities professionally in 
accordance with Table 18.11. Facility Management Company Responsibilities. 
It is Fire and Life Safety manager’s responsibility to prepare a written Emergency 
Action Plan. For guidelines on preparation of Emergency Action Plans, see Chap-
ter 19. Emergency Evacuation Procedures.  

iii.  Fire and Life Safety managers shall have understanding of the Fire and Life Safety 
hazards involved in the healthcare occupancy, such as Medical gases, chemicals, 
LPG, flammable cleaning solvent storage, bedding and clothing storage, large 
scale Kitchen etc. 

iv.  Fire and Life Safety manager shall be aware of the dangers, safety and security 

hazards that can endanger the patient’s and visitors safety. 

v.  Fire and Life Safety managers shall be fully aware of the facility or area exit 

routes, Refuge Areas, Safety of Horizontal Exits, emergency evacuation plans, 
emergency evacuation strategies and procedures. 

vi.  Fire and Life Safety manager shall have fair knowledge of Fire and Life Safety 

equipment and systems in the facility. 

vii.  Fire and Life Safety manager shall be fully aware of operation of Fire and Life 

Safety system controls, smoke control system controls, LPG/Natural gas system 
controls, elevator system controls, Medical gas supply controls, Emergency equip-
ment for healthcare etc. of the building. 

viii. Fire and Life Safety manager shall be well verse with emergency reporting and 

coordinating with Civil Defence. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1216 of 1348 

Table 18.16.: Healthcare Occupancy Management Responsibilities 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

4.  EMERGENCY             

i.  Emergency action plan shall clearly draft out the duties of Fire and Life Safety 

manager’s, Emergency Response Team’s and facility management team’s respec-
tive assigned duties and responses during fire and emergency situations. 

ii.  All employees shall be aware of the healthcare emergency action plans and shall 
be instructed every 6 months to familiarize their role during the emergency situa-
tions. 

iii.  Copy of the Emergency Evacuation Plan in accordance with Chapter 5., Table 

5.1.8., and written Emergency Action Plan, specific duties of Emergency Response 
Team members from specific departments such as intensive care units, physio-
therapy units, sleeping patients section etc. shall be available with respective sec-
tion staff and they shall be aware of their specific pre-designated roles, both fire 
safety roles and medical roles. 

iv.   The written Emergency Action Plan shall be based on the following essential pro-

visions and requirements.                                                                                                  a. 
Selection of Emergency Response Team  from each department from each floor.                                                                                                                                       
b. Duties of Emergency Response Team                                                                                    
c. Duties of Fire and Life Safety manager.                                                                                 
d. Duties and extent of involvement of facility management company personnel                                                                                                                                               
e. Fire Alarm message transmission to Civil Defence as well as in-house Fire and 
Life Safety manager.                                                                                                             
f. Response to Fire Alarms                                                                                                         
g. Isolation of Fire                                                                                                                        
h. Isolation of Smoke                                                                                                               
i. Evacuation of immediate affected area                                                                                 
j. Evacuation of smoke compartment                                                                                 
k. Preparation of floors and building for evacuation                                                              
l. Alternative arrangements for Medical Emergencies                                                        
m. Relocation of patients                                                                                                             
n. Extinguishment of Fire 

v.    For guideline on preparation of Emergency Action Plans and Emergency Drills, see 

Chapter 19. Emergency Evacuation Procedures.  

ACTION 
PLAN 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1217 of 1348 

Table 18.16.: Healthcare Occupancy Management Responsibilities 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

5.  PROTECTION 
OF PATIENTS 

i.  Protection of patients needs a very careful, prompt and effective response from 

the Emergency Response Team and healthcare professionals. 

ii.  The basic priority and response shall be to remove all occupants directly involved 

with fire emergency, immediately by the respective department emergency re-
sponse team member along with the staff. 

iii.  Designated personnel such as central command center, Fire and Life Safety man-
ager or designated emergency response team personnel shall be alerted through 
nurse station telephone or emergency push button to trigger the “evacuation 
alarm”. 

iv.  Designated personnel, upon confirmation of the fire and situation, shall immedi-

ately inform Civil Defence. 

v.  Emergency Response Team, under the leadership of Fire and Life Safety manager 
shall confine the fire by closing doors of the rooms and by isolating section of the 
corridor by closing horizontal exits. 

vi.  Patients in the vicinity of fire shall be immediately relocated to safer sections of 

the building, in the same floor or other floors, in accordance with pre-planned 
Emergency Action Plans and strategies, until the assistance and decision making 
of Civil Defence personnel is available.  

6.  DRILLS 

i.  Emergency Drills shall be conducted once every 6 months, where Emergency Re-

sponse Team, Healthcare building facility management and designated personnel 
shall participate to evaluate their emergency preparedness.  

ii.  Such emergency drills shall be conducted without any evacuation alarm, and 

without patients or visitors evacuation. 

iii.  Emergency drill shall be practiced by the Healthcare Emergency Response Team, 

Fire and Life Safety manager and facility management team,  every month and 
they shall practice their role, communication between departments, the efficien-
cy of the emergency action plan and evaluation of their performance during fire, 
emergency, panic and dangerous situations to execute smooth relocation of pa-
tients to point of safety and recorded for assessment. 

iv.  Emergency Response Team shall also practice the continuation of medical care 

for the patients under emergency situations. 

v.  The testing devices at nurse stations, supervisor rooms etc. to transmit fire alarm 

shall be tested and practiced.  

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1218 of 1348 

2.19. Detention and Correctional Occupancy Management Re-

sponsibilities  

2.19.1.  Detention and Correctional occupancy management responsibilities shall comply 

with Table 18.17. 

Table 18.17.: Detention and Correctional Occupancy Management Responsibilities 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  FACILITY                   

i. 

MANAGEMENT 

It is every Detention and Correctional occupancy administration’s responsi-
bility to ensure that their facility management company complies with the 
following requirement. 

ii.  Detention and Correctional occupancy facility management company shall 

comply with the full requirements of Table 18.11. Facility Management 
Company Responsibilities. 

i.  Every Detention and Correctional occupancy Administration shall have 

2.  DETENTION AND 

CORRECTIONAL 
OCCUPANCY               
EMERGENCY        
RESPONSE TEAM 

“Emergency Response Team” consisting of trained professionals in Fire Safe-
ty, security and first responders for emergency situations. 

ii.  Every Detention and Correctional occupancy Emergency Response Team 

shall consist of minimum of 2 Fire and Life Safety Managers from their own 
staff, when initiated by Civil Defence. 

iii.  Every member of Detention and Correctional occupancy Emergency Re-

sponse Team and staff shall be trained in appropriate Fire extinguisher us-
age, with refresher trainings annually. 

iv.  Every new staff shall be trained in the usage of appropriate fire extinguish-

ers, upon commencement of the duty. 

v.  Fire and Life Safety Managers shall obtain training from Civil Defence and 

shall be certified and licensed by Civil Defence. 

vi.  It is every Detention and Correctional occupancy Administration’s responsi-

bility to formally request Civil Defence for their fire and life safety manager’s 
training, when initiated by Civil Defence. 

3.  FIRE AND LIFE 

i. 

SAFETY                  
MANAGER’S               
RESPONSIBILITIES 

ii. 

It is Fire and Life Safety manager’s responsibility to monitor, record and en-
sure that facility management company executes their responsibilities pro-
fessionally in accordance with Table 18.11. Facility Management Company 
Responsibilities. 
It is Fire and Life Safety manager’s responsibility to prepare a written Emer-
gency Action Plan. For guidelines on preparation of Emergency Action Plans, 
see Chapter 19. Emergency Action Plans.  

iii.  Fire and Life Safety managers shall have understanding of the Fire and Life 

Safety hazards involved in the Detention and Correctional occupancies, such 
as Arson, sabotage, riots, tampering of Fire and Life Safety equipment, LPG, 
flammable cleaning solvent storage, bedding and clothing storage, large 
scale Kitchen etc. 

iv.  Fire and Life Safety manager shall be aware of the dangers and security haz-

ards that can endanger the prison inmates, staff and visitors safety. 

v.  Fire and Life Safety managers shall be fully aware of the facility or area lock-
ups, secured exits, access controlled exits, confined assembly areas, refuge 
areas, exit routes, emergency evacuation plans, emergency evacuation strat-
egies and procedures. 

vi.  Fire and Life Safety manager shall have fair knowledge of Fire and Life Safety 

equipment and systems in the facility. 

vii.  Fire and Life Safety manager shall be fully aware of operation of Fire and Life 
Safety system controls, smoke control system controls, LPG/Natural gas sys-
tem controls, elevator system controls, Access control system controls etc. of 
the building. 

viii. Fire and Life Safety manager shall be well verse with emergency reporting 

and coordinating with Civil Defence. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1219 of 1348 

Table 18.17.: Detention and Correctional Occupancy Management Responsibilities 

 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

4.  EMERGENCY             

i.  Detention and Correctional occupancy shall have staff attending to facility and 

ACTION PLAN 

the management 24 hours. 

ii.  10% of such staff from every shift, shall be members of Emergency Response 

Team. 

iii.  Such Emergency Response Team staff shall be within 91 m horizontal distance of 

the access doors of each resident lockups, cells and living areas, unless the lock 
release mechanism is remotely operated. 

iv.  Such staff shall release the locks necessary to emergency evacuate the inmates 

to a safe confined assembly area, within 2 minutes of the fire alarm. 

v.  Emergency action plan shall clearly draft out the duties of Fire and Life Safety 

manager’s, Emergency Response Team’s and facility management team’s respec-
tive assigned duties, restrictions and responses during fire and emergency situa-
tions. 

vi.  All employees shall be aware of the Detention and Correctional occupancy  

emergency action plans and shall be instructed every month to familiarize their 
role during the emergency situations. 

vii.  Copy of the written emergency action plan, specific duties of Emergency Re-

sponse Team members from specific departments shall be available to the staff 
at all times and they shall be aware of their specific pre-designated roles, both 
fire safety roles and policing roles during emergency situations. 

viii. For guideline on preparation of Emergency Action Plans and Emergency Drills, 

see Chapter 19. Emergency Action Plans.  

5. PRECAUTIONS 

i. 

ii. 

It is Detention and Correctional occupancy administration’s responsibility to edu-
cate, encourage inmates to report unsafe practices, flammable and hazardous 
materials storage and suspicious activities to the Supervising staff. 
It is Detention and Correctional occupancy administration’s responsibility to in-
form the dangers of fire and constrained evacuation of inmates to limited safety 
of confined and restricted environment. 

iii.  Books, clothing and other combustible personal property allowed in sleeping 

rooms shall be stored in closable metal lockers or an approved fire-resistant con-
tainer. 

iv.  The number of heat producing appliances such as toasters and hot plates, and 

the overall use of electrical power within a  sleeping room shall be controlled by 
facility administration.  

v.  Portable space-heating devices shall be prohibited in all detention and correc-

tional occupancies. 

vi.  All keys necessary for unlocking doors installed in a means of egress shall be indi-

vidually identified by both touch and sight.  

vii. Doors and door hardware in means of egress shall be inspected monthly by an 

appropriately trained person. The inspection shall be documented. 

6. DRILLS 

i.  Emergency Drills shall be conducted once every 6 months, where Emergency 

Response Team, Detention and Correctional building facility management and 
designated personnel shall participate to evaluate their emergency prepared-
ness.  

ii.  Such emergency drills shall be conducted without any evacuation alarm, and 

without inmates or visitors evacuation. 

iii.  Emergency drill shall be practiced by the Detention and Correctional occupancy 

Emergency Response Team, Fire and Life Safety manager and facility manage-
ment team,  every month and they shall practice their role, communication be-
tween departments, the efficiency of the emergency action plan and evaluation 
of their performance during fire, emergency, panic and dangerous situations to 
execute smooth relocation of inmates to point of safety shall be conducted and 
recorded for assessment. 

iv.  The testing devices, unlocking devices, access control devices etc. to transmit fire 

alarm and initiate inmate evacuation shall be tested and practiced.  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1220 of 1348 

2.20. Mall Management Responsibilities  

2.20.1.  Mall management responsibilities shall comply with Table 18.18. 

Table 18.18.: Mall Management Responsibilities 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

i. 
1.  FACILITY                   

MANAGEMENT 

It is every Mall management’s responsibility to ensure that their facility man-
agement company complies with the following requirement. 

ii.  Mall facility management company shall comply with the full requirements of 

Table 18.11. Facility Management Company Responsibilities. 

2.  MALL           

EMERGENCY        
RESPONSE 
TEAM 

i.  Every Mall Administration shall have “Emergency Response Team” consisting of 
trained professionals in Fire Safety, security and first responders for emergency 
situations. 

ii.  Every Mall Emergency Response Team shall consist of minimum of 2 Fire and 
Life Safety Managers from the Mall management staff, when initiated by Civil 
Defence. 

iii.  Every Mall Emergency Response Team shall consist of minimum of 2 Crowd 

Managers, when initiated by Civil Defence. 

iv.  Every member of Mall Emergency Response Team and staff shall be trained in 

appropriate Fire extinguisher usage, with refresher trainings annually. 

v.  Fire and Life Safety Managers and Crowd managers shall obtain training from 

Civil Defence and shall be certified and licensed by Civil Defence. 

vi.  It is every Mall Administration’s responsibility to formally request Civil Defence 
for their fire and life safety manager’s and crowd manager’s training, when ini-
tiated by Civil Defence. 

3.  FIRE AND LIFE 

i. 

SAFETY                  
MANAGER’S               
RESPONSIBILI-
TIES 

ii. 

It is Fire and Life Safety manager’s responsibility to monitor, record and ensure 
that facility management company executes their responsibilities professionally 
in accordance with Table 18.11. Facility Management Company Responsibili-
ties. 
It is Fire and Life Safety manager’s responsibility to prepare a written Emergen-
cy Action Plan. For guidelines on preparation of Emergency Action Plans, see 
Chapter 19. Emergency Evacuation Procedures.  

iii.  Fire and Life Safety managers shall have understanding of the Fire and Life Safe-

ty hazards involved in the Mall, such as storages, LPG, flammable cleaning sol-
vent storage, heavy crowd movement, etc. 

iv.  Fire and Life Safety manager shall be aware of the dangers and security hazards 

that can endanger people safety. 

v.  Fire and Life Safety managers shall be fully aware of the facility or area exits, 

corridors, parking levels, assembly areas, refuge areas, exit routes, emergency 
evacuation plans, emergency evacuation strategies and procedures. 

vi.  Fire and Life Safety manager shall have fair knowledge of Fire and Life Safety 

equipment and systems in the facility. 

vii.  Fire and Life Safety manager shall be fully aware of operation of Fire and Life 

Safety system controls, smoke control system controls, LPG/Natural gas system 
controls, elevator system controls, Access control system controls etc. of the 
Mall. 

viii. Fire and Life Safety manager shall be well verse with emergency reporting and 

coordinating with Civil Defence. 

4.  CROWD                        

i.  Every Mall have a minimum of 2 trained Crowd Managers. 
ii.  Where occupant load is more than 250 people, there shall be additional 1 

MANAGERS 

 

crowd manager for every 250 people. 

iii.  Crowd mangers shall be fully aware and familiar with Mall Emergency Evacua-

tions plans and Emergency evacuation procedures. 

iv.  Crowd managers shall coordinate with Fire and Life Safety managers, facility 

management, tenant staff, food court staff, supermarket staff, play area staff to 
pre-plan the specific roles and duties of each tenants and incorporate the 
crowd management strategies into the Emergency Action plans. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1221 of 1348 

 

Table 18.18.: Mall Management Responsibilities 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

 

v.    Crowd manager shall have control over the occupant load and capacity of the 

Mall and shall have strategies to control crowd entry into Mall or specific areas, 
when crowd exceeds the safety level and exit capacities. 

5.  EMERGENCY             

i.  Mall management shall coordinate with the Fire and Life Safety managers, crowd 

managers, Emergency response team and facility management team to prepare 
and maintain written Emergency Action Plan, where individuals duties and re-
sponses during emergency situations is clearly mentioned and assigned. 

ii.  Mall management personnel and their emergency response team shall know 

their specific role such as but not limited to, as follows                                                                                                
a. Confirmation of fire alarm by physically verifying at the location of the building 
or area.                                                                                                                                                 
b.  Informing, reporting emergency incident to Civil Defence and coordinate with 
them when they arrive.                                                                                                                  
c. Evacuating section of the Mall, retail or assembly areas                                                                                                               
d. Assisting elderly and disabled to evacuate smoothly, using buggies and other 
acceptable means.                                                                                                                   
d. Coordination and planning with crowd manager to manage evacuation and 
leading evacuees to designated assembly points.                                                                                    
e. Evaluation and assessment of initial stages of fire and usage of extinguishers 
and hose reel system, if it is assessed as safe to do so.                                                                                                                                        
f. Understanding of the elevator and escalator operation during emergencies and 
managing elevator evacuation, if it is safe to do so. 

iii.  All Mall employees, including retail, supermarket, paly area, food court employ-

ees shall be aware of the Mall emergency action plans and shall be instructed 
every month to familiarize their role during the emergency situations. Various 
occupancy management responsibilities as mentioned in other parts of this chap-
ter shall also be referred to, for specific area management team members. 
iv.  Copy of the written emergency action plan, specific duties of Emergency Re-

sponse Team members from specific departments and role of individual tenants 
shall be available to the staff at all times and they shall be aware of their specific 
pre-designated roles during emergency situations. 

v.  For guideline on preparation of Emergency Action Plans and Emergency Drills, 

see Chapter 19. Emergency Action Plans.  

i.  Emergency Drills shall be conducted once every 6 months, where Emergency Re-
sponse Team, Crowd managers, Fire and Life Safety managers, Mall facility man-
agement and designated personnel shall participate to evaluate their emergency 
preparedness.  

ii.  Such emergency drills shall be conducted without any evacuation alarm, and 

without Mall people or staff evacuation. 

iii.   Drill shall be conducted to explore the efficiency of the emergency action plan 

and to evaluate their performance during fire, emergency, panic and dangerous 
situations to execute smooth evacuation of the crowd to safety of exterior or 
point of safety. 

iv.   The time duration it takes for the occupants to fully reach the safety of exterior 

shall be evaluated and improvised. 

v.    Communication between the designated personnel, decision making, under-

standing of specific roles without hampering others’ assigned duties etc. shall be 
evaluated and recorded for assessment. 

i.  Drills should be conducted only for designated personnel of the Mall, without 

causing unnecessary panic and chaos among the uninformed and unsuspecting 
public crowd. 

ACTION PLAN 

6. DRILLS 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1222 of 1348 

2.21. Event Organizer’s Responsibilities  

2.21.1.  Event organizer’s responsibilities shall comply with Table 18.19. 

Table 18.19.: Event Organizer’s Responsibilities 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  APPROVALS 

2. COOKING/LPG 

i.  Event organizers shall be registered at Civil Defence. 
ii.  Every event, outdoor or indoor shall require Civil Defence NOC. 
iii.  It is event organizer’s responsibility to obtain Civil Defence approvals a mini-

mum of 7 days before the event. 

iv.  It is event organizer’s responsibility to prepare the application for the event 

NOC from Civil Defence, complete with event details, layouts, occupant load, 
provision of location for electrical generators, ambulances, fire trucks etc. in 
accordance with “Event Permission Application and Drawing Submission re-
quirement” in compliance with Annexure 2., A2.8. Event proposal Submis-
sion Requirements. 

v.  Please refer to Annexure A2, Table A2.7., for number of exits, Fire and Life 
Safety requirements for events. Event applications not complying to those 
requirements shall not be acceptable to Civil Defence. 

i. 

ii. 

It is event organizer’s responsibility to comply with all the LPG/Natural gas 
requirements, if LPG/Natural gas is intended in the event either for cooking 
or for flame shows or any of such activities. 
It is event organizer’s responsibility to allow only Civil Defence approved 
Food Trucks. 

iii.  It is event organizer’s responsibility to appoint Civil Defence approved and 

listed LPG/Natural gas contractor to design, install, inspect and maintain the 
LPG/Natural gas applications in compliance with Chapter 11. Liquid Petrole-
um Gas Requirements. 

iv.  It is event organizer’s responsibility to ensure that Civil Defence listed LPG/

Natural gas contractor obtains formal approval for LPG installations from 
Civil Defence, a minimum of 7 days before the event. 

v.  Event organizer shall ensure that LPG related installations shall be installed 

and supplied only by Civil Defence approved companies and not by MEP, 
electrical, general or décor contractors. 

3.  FIRE TRUCK AND 
FIRE APPARATUS 

i. 

It is event organizer’s responsibility to discuss the event with Civil Defence 
Operations Department to jointly evaluate the nature of event, number of 
people involved in organizing the event, number of people gathering in the 
event and the risk involved. 

ii.  Where, Civil Defence evaluation of the event requires the presence of Civil 
Defence fire trucks and apparatus, it is event organizer’s responsibility, to 
formally apply for the Civil Defence trucks and apparatus. 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1223 of 1348 

Table 18.19.: Event Organizer’s Responsibilities 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. GENERAL 
 
i. 

It is event organizer’s responsibility to provide full details of the pyrotech-
nics/flame show/fire works, if any, to Civil Defence in the application for Civil 
Defence NOC. 

ii.  No pyrotechnics or flame shows or fire works shall be permitted without Civil 

Defence approvals. 

iii.  Where, pyrotechnics or flame shows use LPG/Natural gas, the LPG/Natural 

gas contractor shall obtain Civil Defence NOC as required by Table 18.19.2. in 
compliance with Chapter 11. Table 11.12. 

iv.  It is event organizer’s responsibility to obtain flame shows/pyrotechnics 

equipment approval certificates from supplier and manufacturer and shall be 
submitted to Civil Defence along with NOC application. 

v.  Where fire works are intended, it is event organizer’s responsibility to in-

clude full details and duration and timings of the show, company executing 
the fire works display etc. shall be submitted to Civil Defence along with NOC 
application.   

 
2. OPERATOR QUALIFICATION AND RESPONSIBILITY 
 
i.  Operator of the fireworks display shall be a qualified, trained and experi-

enced person with valid license from Dubai Civil Defence. 

ii.  Dubai Civil Defence permit and NOC for the event of fire display is mandato-
ry. Every operator must have this permit well in advance of the event date. 

iii.  All the equipment, material, fuses, electrical wiring, safety features, han-

dling, assembly, testing, and operational manual shall be in compliance with 
NFPA 1123 and approved by international testing and certification bodies. 

iv.  Fireworks, shells, equipment shall be labeled as per manufacturers and certi-

fication guidelines. 

v.  Warning signs conveying safety warnings, as declared by manufacturer shall 

be posted on all products, product containers and storage arrangements. 
(For example, “Explosives”) 

vi.  Storage, or transportation of fireworks materials and devices intended for 
outdoor display prior to their delivery to the display site shall be in compli-
ance with Dubai Municipality and Dubai Civil Defence hazardous and danger-
ous goods storage and transport guidelines. 

vii.  Preparation of firework equipment and material for display shall be carried 

out a minimum of 30 m away from public access. 

viii. Repairing of firework shells shall not be done on the display preparation site. 
ix.  Fireworks materials shall not be stored or displayed in any containers or 

x. 

methods, other than as supplied by manufacturer. 
Installation, inspection and testing shall be done in compliance with manu-
facturer’s guidelines and NFPA 1123. 

xi.  The display site plan shall be submitted to DCD for formal approval. Such a 

site plan shall include the dimensions of the discharge site, spectator viewing 
area, parking areas, and the fallout area and the associated separation dis-
tances. 

xii.  Operator shall ensure that any underground installation of mortars or cables 
are not interfering with existing underground installations such as electrical 
cables, LPG piping or any service trenches. 

3.  PYROTECHNICS/ 

FIRE WORKS 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1224 of 1348 

 

 

ITEMS 

Table 18.19.: Event Organizer’s Responsibilities 

REQUIREMENTS 

5.  ELECTRICAL  

i. 

SAFETY 

It is event organizer’s responsibility to ensure that all electrical installations, 
cables, lighting, generators etc. are installed by professional electrical contrac-
tor in accordance with electrical safety regulations of “Utility Provision Authori-
ty”. 

6. STRUCTURE 

7.  MANPOWER 

i. 

ii. 

It is event organizer’s responsibility to ensure that the structural aspect of the 
event such as Tents, Stages, Grandstands, Seating arrangements, Platforms etc. 
are installed by experienced professionals. 
It is event organizer’s responsibility to obtain material test certificates from the 
suppliers of tents, pre-engineered grandstands and kiosks, to be submitted to 
Civil Defence along with permission application, in accordance with Annexure 
2. Drawing Submission Requirements. 

i.  Every event organizer shall have “Emergency Response Team” consisting of 

trained professionals in Fire Safety, security and first responders for emergency 
situations. 

ii.  Every event organizer Emergency Response Team shall consist of minimum of 2 

Fire and Life Safety Managers from the event organizing staff, when initiated 
from Civil Defence. 

iii.  Every event organizer Emergency Response Team shall consist of minimum of 2 

Crowd Managers, when initiated from Civil Defence. 

iv.  Every member of event organizing Emergency Response Team and staff shall 
be trained in appropriate Fire extinguisher usage, with refresher trainings an-
nually. 

v.  Fire and Life Safety Managers and Crowd managers shall obtain training from 

Civil Defence and shall be certified and licensed by Civil Defence. 

vi.  It is every event organizer’s responsibility to formally request Civil Defence for 
their fire and life safety manager’s and crowd manager’s training, when initiat-
ed from Civil Defence. 

8.  FIRE AND LIFE 

i. 

SAFETY                  
MANAGER’S               
RESPONSIBILI-
TIES 

It is Fire and Life Safety manager’s responsibility to prepare a written Emergen-
cy Action Plan for the event. For guidelines on preparation of Emergency Action 
Plans, see Chapter 19. Emergency Evacuation Procedures.  

ii.  Fire and Life Safety managers shall have understanding of the Fire and Life 

Safety hazards involved in the event, such as Arson, LPG, heavy crowd move-
ment, electrical accidents etc. 

iii.  Fire and Life Safety manager shall be aware of the dangers and security hazards 

that can endanger people safety. 

iv.  Fire and Life Safety managers shall be fully aware of the area exits, corridors,  
assembly areas, refuge areas, exit routes, emergency evacuation plans, emer-
gency evacuation strategies and procedures. 

v.  Fire and Life Safety manager shall have full knowledge of selection and opera-

tion of Fire extinguishers. 

vi.  Fire and Life Safety manager shall be well verse with emergency reporting and 

coordinating with Civil Defence. 

9.  CROWD                        

i.  Every event organizer shall have a minimum of 2 trained Crowd Managers. 
ii.  Where occupant load is more than 250 people, there shall be additional 1 

MANAGERS 

 

crowd manager for every 250 people. 

iii.  Crowd mangers shall be fully aware and familiar with event Emergency Evacua-

tions plans and Emergency evacuation procedures. 

iv.  Crowd managers shall coordinate with Fire and Life Safety managers to pre-

plan the specific roles and duties of each member and incorporate the crowd 
management strategies into the Emergency Action plans. 

v.  Crowd manager shall have control over the occupant load and pre-planned 

maximum capacity of the event, and shall have strategies to control crowd en-
try into event and specific areas, when crowd exceeds the safety level and exit 
capacities. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1225 of 1348 

2.22. Resident’s and Tenant’s Responsibilities  

2.22.1.  Residential building and Apartment Residents and Tenants shall adhere to their re-

sponsibilities in accordance with Table 18.20. 

Table 18.20.: Residents’ and Tenants’ Responsibilities 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  AWARENESS 

i. 

It is every resident’s responsibility to follow fire safety rules and regulations 
and participate actively in safeguarding the premises from fire accidents. 
ii.  Residents shall be aware of fire strategy of the building through dialogue 

with facility management. 

iii.  Residents shall be familiar with emergency evacuation plans of the building 

to know their exits, exit access corridors, stairs to outside and assembly 
points of the building. 

iv.  It is resident’s responsibility to inform the facility management about pres-

ence of any disabled and mentally unstable members in the family. 

v.  Residents shall familiarize themselves with building fire fighting equipment 
such as location of extinguishers and usage of such extinguishers appropri-
ately during initial stages of fire. 

vi.  It is resident’s responsibility to report  to the facility management when any 

discrepancies and violations of fire safety in the building are witnessed. 

vii.  It is resident’s responsibility to educate their children about potential fire 

risks and observing fie safety at home and at the building. 

i.  Residents shall never leave children, special needs people, mentally chal-

lenged and unstable or elderly people unattended and unsupervised near the 
balconies, near windows, at railings or terraces. 

ii.  Residents shall be fully aware of the dangers of balcony accidents and shall 
never be ignorant in furniture arrangements in living spaces. Furniture, bed-
ding, articles or climbable objects such as plant pots, landscaping, décor 
items, play items, exercise items near balconies and windows which could be 
used as ladders by innocent and unwary children. 

2.  BALCONY,              

WINDOWS,               
TERRACES, 
SWIMMING 
POOLS 

iii.  Access to balconies, windows and terraces shall be locked when children, 

special needs people, mentally challenged and unstable people, elderly peo-
ple are left unattended at home. 

iv.  Alcohol, medication, drugs and intoxication can cause fatal accidents for self 
and others. As responsible individuals, observe safe behavior near balconies, 
windows, terraces and railings. 
Inspect your balconies, railings and windows for any signs of damage and 
inform facility management immediately demanding corrective actions. 

v. 

vi.  Provide safety locks for balcony access, sliding windows and window panes 

opening more than 125 mm. 

vii.  It is residents responsibility not to leave children, special needs people, men-

tally challenged and unstable or elderly people at the swimming pools un-
attended. Accidents occur in seconds. 

i.  Observe fire safety during festivals and celebrations, where electrical decora-

tive string lighting, open flames, candles, fire works etc. when mishandled, 
can compromise building fire safety catastrophically. 

ii.  Pyrotechnics, fire works and open flames shall not be activated in balconies 

and terraces. Lighting of pyrotechnics and fire works in places other than 
designated locations is illegal and punishable by law. 

iii.  Lighting of open flames during festivals shall be carried out responsibly and 
under adult supervision in safe locations other than balconies and terraces. 
iv.  Faulty wires, connections and devices of electrical decorative string lighting 

can cause fires. Care shall be taken to use approved and labeled materials 
which shall be installed only by professional electricians. 
v.  Burning of incense shall be done by adults responsibly.  

3.  FESTIVALS AND 
CELEBRATIONS 
(PYROTECHNICS/ 
FIRE WORKS/ 
OPEN FLAMES/ 
CANDLES) 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1226 of 1348 

 

Table 18.20.: Residents’ and Tenants’ Responsibilities 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

4.  BARBEQUE  

i.  BBQ is not permitted in balconies, basements, indoors and on flammable surfac-

es. Residents shall not cook and BBQ either with open flames or with electrical 
appliances at balconies, terraces, basements, parking and on flammable surfaces. 
ii.  Barbequing and cooking at balconies, terraces, basements and parking is against 

the Civil Defence regulation and is punishable. 

5.  SMOKING 

i.  Smoking shall be permitted only at designated smoking areas. 
ii.  Discarding cigarette butts in public areas, on roads and throwing cigarette butts 

from balconies is against the Civil Defence regulation and is punishable. 

i. 
6.  LPG AND            

COOKING 

LPG (Liquid Petroleum Gas) used for cooking is highly flammable and extreme 
care shall be taken to prevent fire accidents from kitchen. 

ii.  Residents shall never attempt multi-tasking such as attending to children and ba-

bies while cooking. 

iii.  Children shall be prevented from playing in the kitchen and near cooking appli-

ances. 

iv.  Cooking shall never be left unattended. 
v.  Faulty piping, flexible hose connections and cooking appliances shall be replaced 

or repaired immediately. 

vi.  Main valve for the LPG supply shall be closed every night after the use. 
vii.  Pressurized aerosols, insect repellents, insect killers, sprays, air fresheners are 

highly flammable and explosive in the pressurized cans and  shall never be applied 
on live cooking appliances and open flames.  

viii. LPG connections, transport or repair shall only be done by professionals. 
ix.  Home makers shall be familiar with usage of fire extinguishers and fire blankets to 

tackle the initial stages of kitchen fires. 

7.  ELECTRICAL               

i. 

APPLIANCES 

It is residents responsibility to use the electrical appliances safely and responsibly. 
User manuals shall be followed for safe usage of electrical appliances. 

ii.  Overloading of electrical sockets and extension cords causes electrical fires. 
iii.  Faulty electrical appliances such as cooking range, microwave, grills, fryers, heat-

ers, grinders, blowers, vacuum cleaners, ironing devices, air-conditioning units, 
lamps etc. can cause not only fires but can also be sources of electrical shocks. It 
is resident’s responsibility to replace or repair such appliances immediately. 

iv.  Water shall not be used on live electrical connections, sockets and wires.  

It is resident’s responsibility to maintain the vicinity clean and free of flammable 
materials. Unattended garbage is a source of fuel for fire. 

ii.  Flammable liquids and materials shall not be stored in bulk quantities or in unau-

thorized or unlabeled containers. 

iii.  Cleaning solvents are flammable and shall not be stored in bulk quantities. 
iv.  It is resident’s responsibility not to block exits, stairs and exit corridors with 

stored items. exits, stairs and corridors shall be free of obstacles at all times for 
smooth evacuation during sudden emergencies. 

v.  Children play items, cycles, plants, unwanted furniture, exercise equipment, shoe 
racks etc. shall not be stored in the stair, at the exits and at exit access corridors. 

vi.  Sprinkler heads  smoke and heat detectors shall not be tampered or blocked. 

i. 

It is resident’s responsibility to take every fire alarm and fire sounders seriously. 
Though there are false alarms sometimes, it is resident’s responsibility to verify 
the fire alarm without neglecting and communicating with facility management.  
ii.  Where there is a real fire alarm intimation, it is resident’s responsibility to leave 

the home without delay and evacuate the building in an orderly and smooth man-
ner without panicking or causing stampede or obstructing fire and rescue opera-
tions by Civil Defence. 

iii.  See Chapter 19. Table 19.2.3.6., for Emergency Evacuation Drills. 

8. HOUSE              

i. 

KEEPING 

9. FIRE ALARMS 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1227 of 1348Chapter 19 
EMERGENCY ACTION PLAN AND 
EVACUATION PROCEDURES 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1228 of 1348In this Chapter: 
Î  Content of Emergency Action Plan 
Î  Types of Evacuation strategies 
Î  Responsibilities of Emergency Response Team 
Î  Emergency Drill procedures 
Î  Frequency of emergency drills 

Intent of the Chapter: 

•  To identify duties of personnel responsible during Emergency 

Evacuations. 

•  To provide guidelines on procedures to be followed during 

Emergency  Evacuations. 

•  To provide emergency drill procedures. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1229 of 1348In this Chapter : 

Intent of the Chapter 

  Content of Emergency Action Plan 

  Types of Evacuation strategies 

  To identify duties of personnel responsible during 

Emergency Evacuations. 

  Responsibilities of Emergency 

  To provide guidelines on procedures to be followed 

Response Team 

during Emergency Evacuations. 

  Emergency Drill procedures 

  Frequency of emergency drills 

  To provide emergency drill procedures. 
 

 

1. Definitions 

1.1. General 

It is a mandatory requirement by Civil Defence. 

It is a suggested requirement recommended by Civil Defence but not mandatory. 

Approved and registered by individual Emirates’ Civil Defence material department. 

A person who is the proprietor and possesses the legal authority from government to 
own the particular land, property, assets, structure, businesses or material 

 
1.1.5.  Facility Management 
 

A Civil Defence approved and registered company with manpower, hired by the own-
er, performs house keeping, security, cleaning, maintaining, repairing, replacing activ-
ities and in general functions as care taker of the property. 

 
1.1.6.  Management under lease 
 

A person or entity who is not the “Owner” of the building but is the user of the build-
ing through renting or leasing contract with the “Owner”. 

1.1.7.  Occupant 
 

A person occupying the building permanently or temporarily as a occupier, sheltered, 
resident, tenant, employee, staff, user, visitor, lease holder, inhabitant and using the 
building for living or working or playing or occupation. 

1.1.1.  Shall  
 
 
1.1.2.  Should 
 
 
1.1.3.  Listed 
 
 
1.1.4.  Owner 
 

 

 

 
 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1230 of 13481.2. Emergency Evacuation 

 
1.2.1.  Emergency  
 

A situation declared by concerned authorities such as Civil Defence, Police, Health 
Authorities, National Disaster Management or at initial stages by facility management 
as “Emergency” where people need assistance and moved to safety.  Such an 
“Emergency” can be a situation created by natural disasters such as earthquakes, 
floods, storms or accidental events such as fire accidents or outbreak of viral infec-
tions or manmade situations such as arson, terrorism and criminal.  

 
1.2.2.  Evacuation 
 

Immediate transfer of people away from the emergency situation and location to a 
point of safety.  

 
1.2.3.  Partial Evacuation 
 

Evacuation of people who are exposed to the immediately affected location or situa-
tion to a point of safety without evacuating people from the entire building or area. 

 
1.2.4.  Horizontal Phased Evacuation 
 

Evacuation of people from one fire compartment to appoint of safety to adjacent fire 
compartment, horizontally, such as in hospitals using horizontal exits. Horizontal 
phased evacuation is acceptable where floors are divided in an approved manner into 
multiple fire resistive compartments and the occupants are moved unsafe compart-
ment to adjacent compartment horizontally to a point of safety. 

Evacuation of all the people from the entire building or area to a point of safety. 

 
1.2.5.  Total Evacuation  
 
 
1.2.6.  Assembly Area (Assembly Point)  
 

A designated area, usually outside and away from a building, which is considered to 
be a safe point when that building is affected during emergencies, where occupants 
of that building are lead to report after evacuating the building. 

 
1.2.7.  Evacuation Drill (Fire Drill) 
 

An exercise involving a simulation of emergency situation in the building (Fire, in this 
document’s context) or area to evaluate the emergency preparedness of the occu-
pants in following the evacuation procedures and assessment of responding emer-
gency personnel effectiveness in delivering their duties such as identifying victims, 
locating fires and emergency situations, and taking protective actions. 

 
1.2.8.  Emergency Action Plan (Emergency Evacuation Procedure) 
 

A pre written and agreed plan, procedure and strategy, particular to certain building 
or occupancy, where actions required by designated personnel and procedures to be 
followed is addressed and documented. Such an emergency action plan is usually 
jointly prepared by the building owner, facility management, occupants (Residents or 
Employees) with approval from concerned authorities. 

 
 
 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1231 of 13481.2. Emergency Evacuation 

 
1.2.9.  Incident Fire Commander  
 

A designated and trained personnel from owner representative or facility manage-
ment or management on lease, responsible for developing and executing emergency 
action plans, strategies, incident supervision and ordering. 

 
1.2.10. Fire Warden  
 

A facility management staff or designated personnel trained to deliver specific duties 
such as assisting people and disabled during evacuation, usage of fire extinguishers 
during initial fire stages, coordination with emergency responders/Civil Defence, 
providing first aid, performing headcount, reporting to fire commander etc., during 
emergencies, as per emergency action plan. 

 
1.2.11. Response Team Member—FIRE RESPONDER 
 

Trained personnel, working under and in close association with Fire Warden who 
upon Fire Warden’s instructions, responds to the initial stages of fire accidents with 
fire extinguishers, fire blankets. 

 
1.2.12. Response Team Member—FIRST AIDERS 
 

Trained personnel, working under and in close association with Fire Warden who 
upon Fire Warden’s instructions, responds to the initial stages of fire accidents with 
first aid. 

 
1.2.13. Response Team Member—ASSEMBLY POINT COORDINATOR 
 

Trained personnel, working under and in close association with Fire Warden who 
upon Fire Warden’s instructions, responds to the initial stages of fire accidents with 
and performs his duties at assembly points to communicate with evacuees and 
headcounts. 

 
1.2.14. Response Team Member—DRILL OBSERVER 
 

Trained personnel, who is an observer of the emergency evacuation drill in a facility, 
making notes of the familiarity of occupants with emergency action plans, proce-
dures, flaws in their response, flaws in the emergency response teams conduct and 
analyzing the efficiency of the over all procedures and the emergency action plan. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1232 of 13482.  Emergency Action Plan, Evacuation and Fire Drill 

 

       2.1. Introduction 

 

2.1.1.  The provisions of this chapter are to provide minimum guidelines on preparation of 
emergency action plans and procedures to ensure the safe and efficient evacuation 
of all occupants in the event of an emergency. 

 
2.1.2.  This guide is in no way all-inclusive nor could any manual be all inclusive of the types 
of emergency situations that may occur.  However, this guide does offer the tenants 
the ability to respond in an effective manner.  

 
2.1.3.  These emergency action plan procedures can be effective only through the coordi-
nated participation of Facility Management, Occupants, Tenants, Employees, and 
The building staff.   

 
2.1.4.  A complete understanding of the proce-

dures by everyone in the building is essen-
tial for any Emergency Plan’s success, when 
the situation demands.  

 
2.1.5.  Practicing an evacuation and emergency 
procedures during a non-emergency drill 
provides training that will be valuable in an 
emergency situation. 

 

2.1.6.  Successful emergency evacuation of the 

buildings and site, during emergencies, de-
pends on prompt and correct decisions of 
the occupants and their immediate actions 
during the first minutes of the incident.  

 
2.1.7. 

 

In an emergency situation, occupants are on 
their own until the arrival of the Civil De-
fence, Police  or Rescue Teams. This fact 
emphasizes the importance of emergency 
preparedness through ready “Emergency 
Action Plans”, “Emergency Evacuation Proce-
dures” and “Emergency Evacuation Drills”. 

Did You Know? 

Studies in earthquake 

prone regions have 

shown that Emergency 

Preparedness by develop-

ing emergency action 

plans and participating in 

emergency drills prepares 

people psychologically. 

They habitually respond 

confidently to successful-

ly evacuate during real 

threats and emergency 

situations. 

2.1.8.  The emergency action plan predetermines the action to be taken by building staff in 
the event of a fire or emergency. This plan shall be put into effect immediately at the 
first indication of a fire or an emergency.  

 
2.1.9.  This chapter is based on the guidelines of NFPA 101, Civil Defence Safety Policies, 
Civil Defence experiences, NFPA Guideline on Highrise buildings and NFPA Q&A 
sections. 

 
2.1.10.  Chapter 18. Responsibilities of Stake holders shall be referred to for the responsibil-

ities of building owners, facility management personnel, Residents, Employees and 
Tenants. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1233 of 13483.  Requirements for Emergency Action Plans 

 

3.1.  The general requirements for emergency action plan shall be as per Table 19.1. 

Table 19.1: Emergency Action Plan Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  PREPARATION  i.  The responsibility of preparation of specific Emergency Plans for the building lies 

with property owner, management firm and the facility management.  

ii.  The responsibility for the implementation of the Emergency Plan and Procedures 

lies with property owner, management firm, the Facilities Manager, designated 
Emergency Evacuation Teams and any other appropriate personnel appointed 
and responsible for specific actions outlined in the plan.  

iii. The appointed Facility management team is responsible for the implementation 

of the documented emergency guidelines and procedures, as a guide in the event 
of an emergency. 

iv. It is facility management ‘s responsibility to provide each tenant (Resident/

Employee/Occupant) with the “Fire Safety at Home/Office/Hotel etc..)” aware-
ness brochure. 

2. CONTENT 

1.  GENERAL  
 
i.  It is of great importance that evacuation procedures and action plans are kept 

simple. 

ii.  Evacuation procedures must be easy to understand and easy for anyone to exe-

cute. 

iii. Emergency plans and procedures shall be primarily in Arabic and English. In addi-
tion, the procedures shall be translated into the language the building occupant 
understands. 

iv. Emergency action plan shall clearly designate and appoint personnel with their 

names, contact details and specific responsibilities. 

v.  Emergency action plan shall have a clear building evacuation plan, prepared in 

accordance with Chapter 5. Table 5.1.8. 

vi. Emergency action plan shall also include the latest, Civil Defence and Municipality 

approved floor plans with locations of main electrical switch board, fire fighting 
equipment, building services control system etc. 

vii. Emergency action plans shall address the fire scenarios and evacuation strategies 

as per Table 19.1.3. 

viii.In addition to the fire accident emergencies in accordance with this chapter, the 

concerned parties shall also consider other emergencies such as earthquakes, 
floods, power outages, natural disasters, terrorism etc., that can affect and 
threaten the life safety of people in liaison with relevant authorities such as Po-
lice,  RTA, DHA, National Disaster Management etc. 

 
2.  UPON DISCOVERING FIRE 
 
i.  It is everyone’s responsibility to be vigilant for fire, smoke and smell. Upon dis-

covering fire accidents, nearest manual fire call point (Manual Pull Station, Manu-
al Push Button) shall be activated to confirm the fire and raise the fire alarm  to 
notify the occupants.  

ii.  Emergency action plan shall clearly mention the method of initiating these alarms 

and location of such alarm initiating devices. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1234 of 1348Table 19.1: Emergency Action Plan Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

2. CONTENT 

3.  UPON HEARING FIRE ALARM 
 
i.  If anyone is in immediate vicinity of fire and smoke and heat is enveloping the 

area, they shall leave the area without delay, using the safe fire exits. 

ii.  Occupants shall not wait for Lifts, elevators and escalators and shall not be used 

during fire emergencies, unless guided and operated by Civil Defence or Fire 
Wardens as per predetermined  strategy. 

iii. Occupants shall not re-enter the building, until instructed and guided by the fire 

response team. 

iv. Upon hearing the fire alarm, designated personnel shall undertake their responsi-
bilities in accordance with the prewritten strategy and action plans in accordance 
with Table 19.1.5. 

v.  Occupants shall follow the strategy as per the instructions of Fire Warden, Inci-

dent Fire commander or emergency response team member. 

 
4.  CALLING CIVIL DEFENCE 
 
i.  However small the fire accident is, Civil Defence shall be notified immediately by 

the occupants, facility management, security or fire wardens upon discovering 
the fire. 

ii.  Call Civil Defence on 997. 
iii.  When 997 is called follow these simple communication format, clearly.                                 
a. “There is fire accident at XXXXX (Location-Area)”                                                                    
b. Mention exact Location with Building number, (such as Makhani numbers or 
any identification numbers, street numbers, landmarks etc.)                                                     
c. Nature of the building (Such as Number of Floors, “Very tall building”, 
“School”, “Hospital” etc.)                                                                                                                                         
d. Your Name and Location                                                                                                                    
e.  If there are injured or seriously affected or trapped persons in the building. 

 
5.  INITIATION OF EMERGENCY ACTION PLANS 
 
i.  Sound of fire alarm shall be the initiation of the building emergency action plan 

and shall be put into action. 

ii.  The action plan strategies shall be specific to each building in accordance with 

Table 19.1.3. 

iii. The emergency response and management team shall be in accordance with  

Table 19.1. 4. 

iv. The responsibilities of the emergency response team shall be in accordance with 

Table 19.1. 5. 

v.  Occupants, Staff, Employees, Visitors shall respond to emergency action plans 

and perform their responsibilities in accordance with Table 19.1.6. 

vi. The Assembly point shall confirm to Table 19.1.7. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1235 of 1348Table 19.1: Emergency Action Plan Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

3. STRATEGIES  

1.  GENERAL  
 
i.  The fundamental goal of any emergency response strategy shall be to move peo-

ple to a point of safety from the emergency situation. 

ii.  Accurate communication and methods of communication between emergency 

management team and occupants is of high importance to achieve orderly evacu-
ation.  

iii. Withholding information from the occupants may not resolve panicking in every 

situation. 

iv. Effective coordination between facility emergency management team and vari-

ous responding agencies such as Civil Defence, Police, Medical Services etc. 

v.  Irrespective of the strategy, the emergency management team shall ensure that 

exit routes, elevators and corridors are free of fire and smoke and are safe to use. 

 
2.  NO EVACUATION (REMAIN IN PLACE) STRATEGY  
 
i.  Any “No Evacuation (Remain in place)” strategies shall be evaluated and certified 

by Civil Defence.  

ii.  Remain in place strategy shall be adapted for facilities where in depth analysis of 
nature of building, hazard and occupants proves that such an action would best 
provide for the safety of building occupants. For example                                                  
a. A small fire incident in the residential and hotel apartment unit or hotel guest 
room,  or service rooms such as transformer rooms, generator rooms, electrical 
rooms etc., where total or partial evacuation may not be necessary. Except for 
the occupants of such unit, rest of the occupants can remain in place till the 
emergency management team notifies.                                                                                    
b. Remain in place strategy may not be a suitable strategy for a factory or ware-
house or commercial unit fire, however small, as the fire load in such units may-
be significantly higher and fire spread can be quick and  unpredictable.                      

 
3.  PARTIAL EVACUATION STRATEGY 
 
i.  Partial evacuation would a suitable strategy for highrise, Superhighrise buildings 

and hospitals, where total evacuation, upon contained fire incidents maybe im-
practical and unnecessary. For example,                                                                           
a. It is impractical for immediate evacuation of the entire highrise and super high-
rise office building because of a fire incident in one of the offices or basements. 
Partial evacuation strategy till the incident is assessed by first responders would 
be a suitable strategy to restrict the evacuation to fire floor, floor above and floor 
below.                                                                                                                                                
b. Hospitals, where total evacuation of bedridden patients, physically disabled 
and sick would be unnecessary, where fire accident maybe contained in small 
rooms, store rooms, basements etc. Partial evacuation of immediately affected 
people and areas through horizontal exits, to a point of safety would be a pre-
ferred strategy till the situation is assessed further. 

 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1236 of 1348Table 19.1: Emergency Action Plan Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

3. STRATEGIES  

4.  TOTAL EVACUATION STRATEGY 
 
i.  Total evacuation would be necessary where emergency management team 

assesses the situation as out of control or where full evacuation is the best op-
tion to achieve occupant’s safety. For example,                                                                       
a. Building has exterior façade fires where fire can envelope the building swift-
ly.                                                                                                                                                         
b.  Where emergency management team assesses the situation as out of con-
trol and decides to evacuate the entire building.                                                                           

 
5.   MOVE OCCUPANTS TO REFUGE AREA IN THE SAME BUILDING 
 
i.  Any “Move occupants to Refuge Area” strategies shall be evaluated and certi-

fied by Civil Defence.  

ii.  Where emergency management team analyses the situation as fully in control, 

or where fires are small and are contained to compartment, or area is filled 
with smoke and toxic gases, occupants’ transfer to a safe refuge area to a 
point of safety in the same building, instead of evacuating them from the 
building would be an acceptable strategy.                                                                        

4. THE EMERGENCY                                 

MANAGEMENT 
TEAM  

1.  OWNER 
 
i.  Emergency action plan shall be initiated and prepared by the owner and own-

er’s representative.  

ii.  It is owner’s responsibility to appoint the emergency management team 

through facility management.  

iii. It is owner’s responsibility to handover the emergency action plans to the 

hired facility management or the management of the occupancy under own-
er’s lease to follow.   

 
2.  FACILITY MANAGEMENT  OR  MANAGEMENT UNDER LEASE 
 
i.  It is facility management team OR under lease management’s responsibility to 

appoint trained and able personnel to follow the emergency action plan. The 
appointed personnel shall be as follows.                                                                                    
a. Incident Fire Commander                                                                                                                
b. Assistant Incident Fire Commander                                                                                           
c. Fire Warden                                                                                                                                   
d. Assistant Fire Warden                                                                                                                  
e. Response Team of minimum 4 personnel. (Fire Responder, First Aider, As-
sembly Point Coordinator, Drill observer)  

ii.  The appointed emergency response team shall deliver their duties in accord-
ance with Table 19.1.5. Responsibilities of Emergency Response Team Per-
sonnel. 

iii. Volunteers from the building that the facility management or management 
under lease is managing (Such as Residents, Students, Employees, Staff etc.) 
shall be permitted and encouraged to be involved as Emergency Response 
Team Members) 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1237 of 1348Table 19.1: Emergency Action Plan Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

5.  RESPONSIBILITIES 

OF EMERGENCY             
RESPONSE TEAM 
PERSONNEL 

1.  INCIDENT FIRE COMMANDER  
 
i. 

Incident Fire Commander and assistant incident fire commander of the team 
shall be a person who is on duty in the building on regular basis.  

ii.  Assistant incident commander shall perform incident fire commander’s re-

sponsibilities when incident fire commander is not on duty. 

iii.  It is Incident Fire Commander ‘s responsibility to perform initial assessment 

of the situation and take actions as per written emergency action plans. 

iv.  Incident Fire Commander shall communicate the incident nature and assess-

v. 

ment to occupants. 
It is Incident Fire Commander ‘s responsibility to deliver specific instructions 
to particular emergency incidents to occupants and emergency response 
team. 

vi.  The Incident Fire Commander shall have the authority to supervise, instruct, 
monitor, use resources and order the team and occupants during the emer-
gency.  

vii.  It is Incident Fire Commander ‘s responsibility to assign specific duties to the 

team members in accordance with emergency action plan and strategies. 
viii. It is Incident Fire Commander ‘s responsibility to coordinate with and brief 

the incident to the Civil Defence and Police when they arrive on site. 

ix.  Incident Fire Commander shall work with Civil Defence and Police by estab-

lishing working stations as Command centers or using the resources and con-
trols at the Emergency Command Center. 

x.  During non emergency period, it is Incident Fire Commander’s responsibility 

to ensure that the team members are familiar with and trained on building 
equipment and safety features such as fire pump, FACP, elevators and smoke 
control system controls etc.  

 
2.  ASSISTANT INCIDENT FIRE COMMANDER 
 
i.  Assistant Incident Fire Commander shall assist the Incident Fire Commander 

in all the duties of Incident Fire Commander as outlined but not limited to  
Table 19.1.5.1. 

ii.  Assistant Incident Fire Commander  shall ensure that all the building exit 

routes, exit corridors and routes are free of obstructions at all times. 

iii. Assistant Incident Fire Commander  shall ensure that building fire and life 

safety equipment are maintained periodically in accordance with latest edi-
tion of UAE Fire and Life Safety Code of Practice. 

iv. Assistant Incident Fire Commander shall monitor the building for changes in 

structure, plans or equipment and report the same to Incident Fire Command-
er to be considered for updating the emergency action plan. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1238 of 1348Table 19.1: Emergency Action Plan Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

5.  RESPONSIBILITIES 

OF EMERGENCY             
RESPONSE TEAM 
PERSONNEL 

building. 

3.  FIRE WARDEN 
 
i.  Fire Warden shall be a full time employee or staff member on duty in the 

ii.  Fire Warden shall be responsible to execute the instructions from Incident 

Fire Commander, during emergencies and non-emergency situations. 

iii. Fire Warden shall be the first responder to the initial stages of fire. And he 
shall be trained regularly in usage of appropriate type of fire extinguishers, 
fire blankets, first aid and building fire hose system. 

iv. Fire Warden shall call the security room and activate the fire alarm whenever 
a situation could pose immediate danger to people, property, or processes in 
the building. 

v.  Fire Warden shall be responsible for relaying messages from Incident Fire 

Commander to the other team members and occupants. 

vi. Fire Warden  shall be responsible for creating awareness among building oc-
cupants of the emergency action plans and actions to be taken by the occu-
pants.  

vii. Fire Warden shall ensure that occupants, including new occupants/ tenants/ 

employees / contractors are familiar with the evacuation procedures. 

viii.Fire Warden shall ensure that occupants have vacated the floor/area/zone in 
the event of an evacuation and shall check assigned areas prior to leaving the 
building.  

ix. Fire Warden shall ensure that floor plans and route evacuation maps are post-

ed in all relevant places.  

x.  Fire Warden shall participate in the development, communication, implemen-

tation and maintenance of the overall Emergency Plan for their area of re-
sponsibility/zone/ building /office.  

xi. Fire Warden shall be aware of occupants with special needs who may need 

assistance during an evacuation, e.g. hearing- or sight-impaired, on crutches, 
in a wheelchair or otherwise disabled.  

xii. As an integral part of the emergency communication network, Fire Wardens 

are to ensure that occupants in their area are aware of an emergency and the 
need to evacuate.  

xiii.Fire Warden shall assist in the evacuation process as indicated in the Emer-

gency Evacuation Procedure.  

xiv.Fire Warden shall remain at the exit door from the inside of the building and 

continue to guide people to open sky and do not allow people to re-enter.   
xv. Fire Warden shall carry out systematic monthly Fire Safety checks of their as-

signed area to ensure that all fire equipment, exit signs etc. are in place and in 
good working order.  

xvi.Fire Warden shall ensure that a trained Assistant Warden is available during 

absence.  

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1239 of 1348Table 19.1: Emergency Action Plan Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

5.  RESPONSIBILITIES 

OF EMERGENCY             
RESPONSE TEAM 
PERSONNEL 

4.  ASSISTANT FIRE WARDEN 
 
i.  Assistant Fire Warden shall assist the Fire Warden in all the duties of Fire War-

den and perform Fire Warden’s duties in Fire Warden’s absence, as outlined 
but not limited to  Table 19.1.5.3. 

 
5.  RESPONSE TEAM MEMBER—FIRE RESPONDER 
 
i. 
ii. 

Fire Responder shall take instructions from Fire Warden. 
Fire Responders shall be trained and shall know locations and usage method 
of all fire protection equipment.  

iii.  Fire Responders shall move to the location of the fire emergency with suffi-

cient fire extinguishing equipment.  

iv.  Fire Responders shall evaluate the safety of the responder team before 

attempting to fight the fire.  

v.  Only under safe conditions Fire Responder shall fight the fire with a mini-

mum of one (1) back up fire responder to assist in fighting the fire.  

vi.  When the fire has been successfully extinguished, Fire responder shall eval-

uate the burnt material for heat and remove the material from the area to a 
safe place for disposal, upon confirmation that the material is fully extin-
guished.  

vii.  Fire Responders shall follow these rules if they decide to fight fires:                                

a. If in doubt or unconfident – do not fight the fires.                                                                                 
b. Make sure that there are no other fires in the area.                                                         
c. Never tackle a fire alone or if flames are above waist height.                                            
d. Convey to Fire Warden in-charge about the location and activity respond-
ers involved in.                                                                                                                         
e. When using a fire extinguisher, keep low and make sure that the fire is 
attacked with the correct type of extinguisher.                                                                                                               
f. Once the fire is extinguished, report the facts to the Fire Warden at the 
Assembly Point. 

viii.  Fire Responders shall follow these rules if they decide NOT to fight fires:                   

a. Leave the area and check out if people are not in toilets, store rooms, 
etc., but only if it is safe to do so.                                                                                          
b. Confine the fire by closing doors and windows on the way out, if it is safe 
to do so and does not cause undue delay in evacuation. 

ix.  When Civil Defence, Police or Disaster management arrive on site, leave the 

task to professionals and do not interfere unless asked.  

 
6.  RESPONSE TEAM MEMBER—FIRST AIDER 
 
i. 
ii. 

First Aider shall take instructions from Fire Warden. 
First Aider shall be trained and shall know locations and usage of medical 
kit, CPR (cardiopulmonary resuscitation), Emergency treatments etc.  

iii.  First Aiders shall be assigned at an assembly point of the premises. 
iv.  First Aiders shall evacuate immediately when the alarm sounds. 
v. 
First Aiders shall carry first aid kit with them before evacuating the building. 
vi.  First Aiders shall also arrange drinking water at the assembly point and sup-

ply everyone with water to prevent dehydration, exhaustion and fatigue.  

vii.  First Aiders shall attend to  injured and immediately seek professional medi-

cal assistance, depending on the seriousness of the victims. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1240 of 1348Table 19.1: Emergency Action Plan Requirements 

REQUIREMENTS 

 

 

ITEMS 

5.  RESPONSIBILITIES 

OF EMERGENCY             
RESPONSE TEAM 
PERSONNEL 

7.  RESPONSE TEAM MEMBER—ASSEMBLY POINT COORDINATOR  
 
i. 
ii.  Assembly Point Coordinator shall be trained and shall know locations of all 

Assembly Point Coordinator shall take instructions from Fire Warden. 

the assembly points of the building.  

iii.  During a Fire Evacuation, Assembly Point Coordinator shall be in charge of 

assembly point to receive Personnel and assess situation. 

iv.  Assembly Point Coordinator shall make sure that the evacuated people 

stand in line at the designated assembly point. 

v.  Assembly Point Coordinator shall conduct a head count when everyone has 

assembled in an orderly manner. 

vi.  Assembly Point Coordinator shall ensure that the names of assembled peo-

ple are called out loud and make note of their presence and health condi-
tion. 
If people are missing at that assembly point, contact all other remaining as-
sembly points, if any, on the premises to enquire about their presence. 

vii. 

viii.  If a missing person is assumed to be in the building, Assembly Point Coordi-

nator shall inform the Fire Warden and the security room.  

ix.  Assembly Point Coordinator shall make sure that every person on the list 
remains at the assembly point until receiving further instruction from Fire 
Warden.  

x.  Assembly Point Coordinator shall ensure that Senior Civil Defence Officer-in-

charge, gives the “All clear” instruction before allowing people to re-enter 
the building.  

 
8.  RESPONSE TEAM MEMBER—DRILL OBSERVER  
 
i. 

Drill monitor or drill observer shall be appointed by the incident fire com-
mander to monitor and review the emergency drill procedures and compli-
ance with the emergency action plans. 

ii.  Drill observer shall not be commissioned to perform the monitoring duty 

during real emergencies. 

iii.  During real emergencies drill monitor shall assist the emergency response 

teams. 

iv.  Drill monitors and observer duties shall  be                                                                          

a. Observe the communication flow from emergency response team to oc-
cupants.                                                                                                                                       
b.  The usage of exit routes by occupants                                                                           
c. Blockages of exit routes, if any.                                                                                          
d. Difficulties experienced by people to achieve smooth evacuation.                            
e. Difficulties experienced by disabled people, if any.                                                           
f. The role specific responsibilities executed by emergency response team. 
g. Audibility of Voice evacuation messages.                                                                                 
h. Gathering of evacuees at the assembly point .                                                                 
i. Roll call at the assembly point.                                                                                              
j.  Communication flow between occupants and the emergency response 
team.                                                                                                                                             
k. Overall evacuation efficiency of the building.                                                                        
l. Availability of appropriate extinguishers and hose reels. 

v.  Observer shall make note of each observation and its impact on the existing 

emergency action plan. 

vi.  Observer shall use the checklist mentioned in Table 19.3., and assess the 
emergency actin plan to review it with entire emergency response team. 

vii.  Feedback  and suggestions from occupants shall also be entertained to im-

provise the building emergency action plans. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1241 of 1348Table 19.1: Emergency Action Plan Requirements 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

6. OCCUPANTS 

i. 

It is the responsibility of all occupants to be aware of Emergency Action Plan 
of the building and their responsibilities as required by Chapter 18. Respon-
sibilities of Stakeholders, Section 2.21. 

ii.  All occupants shall know the locations of primary and alternate exits and be 

familiar with the various evacuation routes available in the building they 
live, work and play.  

iii.  All occupants shall be familiar with Designated Evacuation Assembly Point 

Areas.  

iv.  Occupants shall not re-enter a building after the fire incident, until “all 

clear” instruction is declared by Civil Defence official. 

v.  Occupants shall know how to report an emergency to the security. 
vi.  Occupants are responsible for their own safety. Stay calm, avoid panic and 

confusion. 

vii.  Occupants shall coordinate and cooperate with Incident Fire Commander, 

Fire Warden and Emergency Response Team members. 

viii.  Occupants shall know the locations and operation of fire extinguishers. 
ix.  Small and Insipid fires can be extinguished using fire extinguishers, only if 
trained and it is safe to do so. However, an immediate evacuation is essen-
tial for any and all fires occurring in the building or response as per building 
emergency strategy. 

x.  Occupants shall never enter a room that is smoke filled.  
xi.  Occupants shall never enter a room if the door is warm or hot when 

touched. 

xii.  Once evacuation order is initiated, occupants shall not re-enter the room or 

area, to collect belongings.  

xiii.  Once FIRE ALARM or EVACUATE ORDER is received, occupants shall select 
the nearest, safest route to exit the area or the building and proceed in an 
orderly manner to the Designated Assembly Point and await further instruc-
tions from the assembly point coordinator.  

xiv.  A head count will be taken to ensure that everyone has safely evacuated. 

Occupants shall not leave the Assembly Point unless told to do so. 

i.  Emergency action plans shall be reviewed and revised as per changes in the 
building, changes in the floor plans, number of occupants, changes in usage, 
changes in management, changes in staff, changes in emergency services con-
tact details etc., every year. 

ii.  The feedback from occupants shall be considered when revising any emergen-

cy action plans. 

iii. The lesson learnt from fire drills conducted in accordance with Section 4 of 
this chapter shall be evaluated and incorporated into the emergency action 
plans. 

iv. See Table 19.3. for Emergency Drill Observer’s checklist. 
 

7. REVIEW 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1242 of 1348Table 19.1: Emergency Evacuation Procedures 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

8.  ASSEMBLY 
POINT OR 
ASSEMBLY 
AREA 

1.  GENERAL 
 
i.  Each building shall have an “assembly point” in accordance with Table 19.1.8. 
ii.  Assembly Point shall be predetermined, identified and designated with sign. 
iii. Large and distributed occupancies such as malls, theme parks, hospitals, schools 

shall have multiple assembly points. 

iv. Consideration shall be given to sheltered assembly points. 
 
2.  LOCATION 
 
i.  The assembly point shall be minimum of 15 m away from the building it is serving. 
ii.  Alternatively, an assembly point shall be at a distance, not less than the height of 

the building. 

iii. The assembly point shall be easily accessible. 
iv. The assembly point shall be in a location safe from the building structure, such that 

occupants are safe from fire heat radiation and falling debris. 

v.  Assembly point shall be away from the fire access road and fire truck parking areas, 

such that the occupant assembly shall not hamper the fire fighters staging and op-
eration activities. 

vi. The landscaping areas, parking lots, pedestrian ways, play grounds etc., away from 

the building shall be permitted as an assembly points. 

 
3.  SIZE 
 
i.  The assembly point shall be large enough to accommodate the building occupants. 
ii.  Where space is constraint, multiple assembly points in various areas shall be per-

mitted. 

iii. A public large open space within 100 m of the building shall be permitted to be a 

“common assembly point” for a group of buildings owned by different owners. 

 
4.  SIGN BOARD 
 
i.  The assembly point shall be identified by the sign, in both Arabic and English, green 

colour and format, in accordance with Figure 19.1.  

 

 

Figure 19.1.: Assembly Point Sign 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1243 of 1348Table 19.1: Emergency Evacuation Procedures 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

9.  VESTS FOR 

i.  Each member of the emergency response team shall wear a fluorescent jacket/

EMERGENCY 
RESPONSE 
TEAM 

vest.  

ii.  Such vests or jackets shall have the “Designation” inscribed on them in capital 

letters, as INCIDENT COMMANDER, FIRE WARDEN, FIRE RESPONDER, FIRST AIDER, 
ASSEMBLY POINT COORDINATOR, OBSERVER etc. 

iii. Such vests shall be kept within reach and put on as soon as an emergency situa-

tion arises and when emergency drills are practiced. 

 

 

Figure 19.2.: Emergency Response Team Vests 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1244 of 13484.  Emergency Evacuation Drills (Fire Drills) 

 

4.1.  The emergency evacuation drills shall comply with Table 19.2. 

Table 19.2: Emergency Evacuation Drills 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  OBJECTIVE 

i.  Emergency Evacuation Drills shall be conducted in every facility that is occupied by 

2. PROCEDURE 

the people so that the occupants get familiar with the building emergency action 
plan, their role in such an emergency action plan and to be prepared psychologi-
cally and habitually to train themselves to respond confidently to an emergency 
situation. 

ii.  Emergency evacuation drills shall be conducted to evaluate the effectiveness of 

the building emergency action plans, crowd movement, time taken for partial 
evacuation, time taken for full evacuation, the familiarity of occupants with the 
building evacuation plans and procedures. 

1.  GENERAL 
 
i.  Emergency Evacuation Drills shall be based on the specific requirements of the pre 

determined emergency action plans, specific to the building, prepared in accord-
ance with Chapter 19., Section 3. with occupancy based considerations as re-
quired by Chapter 18. Responsibilities Of Stakeholders and specific nature of the 
occupancy, people behavior,  topography, risks involved at the occupancy etc. 

ii.  Every occupant shall be familiar with the building emergency action plan prior to 

conducting any emergency evacuation drills or fire drills. 

iii. Evacuation drills shall be scheduled and notified to building occupants by the 

Evacuation Coordinator(s) and Fire Wardens, at least one week prior to the drill. 

iv. Drill shall be conducted to simulate fire conditions and fire scenario conditions 

such as one escape route obstructed, injured on the exit corridor, power failures, 
wrong exit sign directions etc.  

v.  Drill shall be for different fires in each exercise, such as electrical fires, LPG fires, 
garbage fires, furniture fires, kitchen fires, fires at neighboring building, parking 
fires etc. 

 
2.  TRAINING 
 
i.  Training shall be arranged for the occupants (Residents, Staff, Employees, Visitors 
etc.), to familiarize the occupants with building emergency action plans, location 
of manual call points, location of stairs and exit routes, exit signage, location of 
assembly points, location of refuge areas, location of extinguishers, location of fire 
hose reels etc. 

ii.  Training shall touch on but not limited to                                                                                  
a. How to raise fire alarm                                                                                                                
b. How to call Civil Defence                                                                                                             
c. How to use appropriate type of extinguisher                                                                          
d. When not to try to fight fires                                                                                                    
e. How to be familiar with building exits and evacuation plan layouts                                      
f. How to coordinate with building facility management                                                          
g. How to coordinate with building emergency response team                                              
h. How to assist others during emergencies and evacuation  

iii. Occupants shall be familiar with and recognize the emergency response team 

members, incident fire commander and fire wardens of the building. 

iv. Building emergency evacuation procedures and building evacuation plan copies 

shall be handed out to occupants and participants after the training. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1245 of 1348 

Table 19.2: Emergency Evacuation Drills 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

2. PROCEDURE 

3.  PARTICIPATION 
 
i.  All building occupants shall participate in an emergency evacuation drill. 
ii.  During the execution of drills, emphasis shall be placed upon orderly evacua-

tion under proper discipline rather than upon speed.   

 
4.  NOTIFICATIONS 
 
i.  Owner, Facility Management and Management under lease shall be responsi-

ble for  notifying the Civil Defence, if a drill is planned. 

ii.  Such a notification shall be 48 hours prior to the drill schedule as well as an 

hour before the drill. 

iii. Drill notifications shall also be delivered to the neighboring building facility 

management or management under lease. 

3.  DRILLS AND 

1.  FACILITY MANAGEMENT 
 
THEIR                       
FREQUENCY 
i.  Facility management shall have emergency action plan in accordance with 
FOR VARIOUS             
OCCUPANCIES 
AND                           
MANAGEMENTS 

ii.  Facility Management team of every building shall conduct and practice fire 
drills as per building emergency action plans every 6 months, in compliance 
with Chapter 19, Section 4., and Chapter 18, Table 18.11.11. 

Chapter 19. and Chapter 18., Table 18.11.4. 

iii. Such a fire drill shall be only for facility management team and shall not be for 

the occupants. 

iv. Such a fire drill for facility management team shall be to ensure the emergency 

preparedness of the building facility management team. 

v.  Report of such a monthly drill shall be sent to the building owner or manage-

ment under lease. 

vi. See Chapter 18., Table 18.11. for facility management responsibilities. 
 
2.  ASSEMBLY OCCUPANCY  
 
i.  Assembly occupancy management shall have emergency action plan in accord-

ance with Chapter 19. and Chapter 18., Table 18.12.5. 

ii.  Assembly occupancy Management team shall conduct and practice fire drill 

twice every 6 months, in compliance with  Chapter 19, Section 4., and Chapter 
18, Table 18.12.6. 

iii. Drills shall not be required to involve general public of the assembly occupancy. 
iv. See Chapter 18, Table 18.12. for assembly occupancy management responsibil-

ities. 

 
3.  EDUCATIONAL OCCUPANCY 
 
i.  Educational occupancy management shall have emergency action plan in ac-

cordance with Chapter 19. and Chapter 18., Table 18.13.4. 

ii.  Educational occupancy Management team shall conduct and practice fire drill 
once every 6 months, in compliance with Chapter 19, Section 4., and Chapter 
18, Table  18.13.5. 

iii. Drills shall involve entire school occupants, with total evacuation alarm. 
iv. See Chapter 18, Table 18.13. for Educational occupancy management responsi-

bilities. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1246 of 1348ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

Table 19.2: Emergency Evacuation Drills 

4.  BUSINESS-HIGHRISE AND SUPER HIGHRISE BUILDING MANAGEMENT 
 
i.  Highrise Business occupancy management shall have emergency action plan in 

accordance with Chapter 19. and Chapter 18., Table 18.14.4. 

3.  DRILLS AND 

THEIR                       
FREQUENCY FOR 
VARIOUS             
OCCUPANCIES 
AND                           
MANAGEMENTS 

ii.  Highrise Business occupancy Management team shall conduct and practice fire 

drill once every 6 months, in compliance with Chapter 19, Section 4., and 
Chapter 18, Table 18.14.5.1. 

iii. Drills shall involve entire occupants, with total evacuation alarm. 
iv. See Chapter 18, Table 18.14. for Highrise building management responsibili-

ties. 

 
5.  HOTEL-HIGHRISE AND SUPER HIGHRISE BUILDING MANAGEMENT 
 
i.  Highrise Hotel occupancy management shall have emergency action plan in 

accordance with Chapter 19. and Chapter 18., Table 18.15.4. 

ii.  Highrise Hotel occupancy Management team shall conduct and practice fire 
drill every 6 months in accordance with Chapter 19, Section 4., and Chapter 
18, Table 18.15.5. 

iii. Drills shall not be required to involve Hotel guests and visitors. 
iv. See Table 18.14.5.2. and Table 18.15.5. 
 
6.  RESIDENTIAL-HIGHRISE AND SUPER HIGHRISE BUILDING MANAGEMENT 
 
i.  Highrise Residential occupancy management shall have emergency action plan 

in accordance with Chapter 19. and Chapter 18., Table 18.14.4. 

ii.  Highrise Residential occupancy Management team shall conduct and practice 

fire drill once every 6 months in accordance with Chapter 19, Section 4, and 
Chapter 18, Table 18.14.5.3. 

iii. Drills shall involve entire occupants, with total evacuation alarm. 
iv. Drills shall be scheduled on a non-working day so that most of the residents 

can take part in the drill. 

v.  See Chapter 18., Table 18.11. for facility management responsibilities. 
 
7.  HEALTHCARE MANAGEMENT 
 
i.  Healthcare occupancy emergency action plan shall be in accordance with 

Chapter 19 and Chapter 18, Table 18.16.4. 

ii.  Healthcare occupancy Management team shall conduct and practice fire drill 
once every 6 months in accordance with Chapter 19, Section 4. and Chapter 
18, Table 18.16.6. 

iii. Drills shall not be required to involve occupants, patients or visitors. 
iv. Drills shall be scheduled at non-visiting  hours. 
v.  See Table 18.16. for healthcare occupancy management responsibilities. 
 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1247 of 1348ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

Table 19.2: Emergency Evacuation Drills 

3.  DRILLS FOR                 

VARIOUS             
OCCUPANCIES 
AND                           
MANAGEMENTS 

8.  DETENTION AND CORRECTIONAL MANAGEMENT 
 
i.  Detention and Correctional occupancy emergency action plan shall be in ac-

cordance with Chapter 19 and Chapter 18, Table 18.17.4. 

ii.  Detention and Correctional occupancy Management team shall conduct and 

practice fire drill once every 6 months in accordance with Chapter 19, Section 
4. and Table 18.17.6. 

iii. Drills shall not be required to involve occupants, patients or visitors. 
iv. Drills shall be scheduled at non-visiting  hours. 
v.  See Table 18.17. for detention and correctional occupancy management re-

sponsibilities. 

 
9.  MALL MANAGEMENT 
 
i.  Mall emergency action plan shall be in accordance with Chapter 19 and Chap-

ter 18, Table 18.18.5. 

ii.  Mall Management team shall conduct and practice fire drill once every 6 

months in accordance with Chapter 19, Section 4. and Table 18.18.6. 

iii. Drills shall not be required to involve public. 
iv. Drills shall be scheduled at non-visiting  hours with volunteers as public. 
v.  See Table 18.18. for Mall management responsibilities. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1248 of 13484.2.  The emergency evacuation drill observer checklist in its minimum format and content shall 

comply with Table 19.3. 
 

Table 19.3.: Checklist for Emergency Evacuation Drill Observer 

ITEMS 

CHECKLIST 

INFORMATION 

i.  Name and details of the facility/ Building_____________________________ 
1.  FACILITY                  
ii. 
Type of Occupancy______________________________________________ 
iii.  Number of People in the building___________________________________ 
iv.  Address_______________________________________________________ 
v.  Contact Person/Incident Fire Commander____________________________ 
vi.  Phone Number_________________________________________________ 
vii.  Date of the Drill_________________________________________________ 
viii.  Name and Signature of the drill observer______________________________ 

2. BEFORE DRILL 

3. DURING THE 

DRILL 

Civil Defence has been informed 48 hours before and an hour before? Yes/ No 
The occupants are familiar with building emergency action plan? Yes / No 

i. 
ii. 
iii.  The emergency response team is designated and trained? Yes / No 
iv.  The emergency response team has drill vests for identification? Yes / No 
v. 
vi.  Fire wardens have required flash lights? Yes / No 
vii.  First aiders have required first aid kit? Yes / No 
viii.  Disabled people have been identified and assistance is arranged? Yes / No 
ix.  Assembly points are identified and available? Yes / No 

The drill observer has checklist? Yes / No 

Fire was recognized and Manual call points was activated? Yes / No 

Incident Fire Commander performed his duties as per plan? Yes / No 

i. 
ii.  Alarm sound was heard in all areas of the building? Yes / No 
iii.  Occupants evacuated in accordance with emergency action plan? Yes / No 
iv.  Occupant followed “Partial”, “full” or “remained at place” as per plan? Yes/ No 
v.  Was evacuation smooth, quick and orderly? Yes / No 
vi. 
vii.  Fire Warden performed his duties as per plan? Yes / No 
viii.  Fire Responder performed his duties as per plan? Yes / No 
ix.  First aider performed his duties as per plan? Yes / No 
x. 
xi.  Assembly Point Coordinator performed his duties as per plan? Yes / No 
xii.  Anyone did not participate in the drill? Yes / No 
xiii.  Anyone re-entered building without “all clear” instruction? Yes / No 
xiv.  Occupants gathered at Assembly Points in line? Yes / No 
xv.  Assembly point coordinators had list of occupant names? Yes / No 
xvi.  Rest rooms, prayer rooms, store rooms, plant rooms were searched? Yes / No 
xvii.  Self Closing fire doors operated? Yes / No 
xviii. Communication between incident commander and fire warden was as per 

Emergency Response Team performed their duties as per plan? Yes / No 

4. AFTER THE 

DRILL 

Emergency action plan? Yes / No 

xix.   Communication between incident commander and occupants was as per 

Emergency action plan? Yes / No 

xx.  Time taken by occupants to fully evacuate the building__________________ 

i.  Were all occupants (Participants) accounted for? Yes / No 
ii.  Was Civil Defence involved  in the drill? Yes / No 
iii.  Building fire alarm system, sounders, voice evacuation, emergency lighting, 

extinguishers, hose reels, etc., functioned as intended? Yes / No 

iv.  Was there discomfort for occupants in evacuating building? Yes / No 
v.  Was emergency action plan complete in its details and procedures? Yes / No 
vi.  Update required for Emergency action plans? Yes / No 
vii.  Update required for building fire and life safety systems? Yes / No 
viii.  Training required for emergency response team? Yes / No 
ix.  Training required for occupants? Yes / No 
x.  Other recommendations____________________________________________ 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1249 of 1348Chapter 20 
MARINAS 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1250 of 1348In this Chapter: 
Î  Marina construction 
Î  Access to marina by road and by waterfront 
Î  Marina management and operator’s responsibilities 
Î  Fire and life safety requirements for marinas 

Intent of the Chapter: 

•  To ensure acceptable level of fire safety is achieved on marinas, 
boatyards, yacht clubs, docking facilities, residential condominiums 
and associated piers, docks and floats. 

•  To  ensure  fire  safety  is  observed  on  boats,  yachts,  commercial 

vessels  and  recreational  boats. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1251 of 1348 

In this Chapter : 

  Marina construction 

  Access to marina by road and 

by waterfront 

  Marina management and 

operator’s responsibilities 

  Fire and life safety 

INTENTIONS 

  To ensure acceptable level of fire safety is achieved on 

marinas, boatyards, yacht clubs, docking facilities, 
residential condominiums and associated piers, docks 
and floats. 

  To ensure fire safety is observed on boats, yachts, 

commercial vessels and recreational boats. 

requirements for marinas 

  

1. Definitions 

1.1. General 

1.1.1.  Shall  

It is a mandatory requirement by Civil Defence 

1.1.2.  Should 

It is a suggested requirement recommended by Civil Defence but not 
mandatory. 

1.1.3.  Listed 

Approved and registered by individual Emirates’ Civil Defence material 
department. 

1.1.4.  Approved 

Approved and registered by individual Emirates’ Civil Defence material 
department. 

 

 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1252 of 13481.2. Marinas 

 
1.2.1.  Marina  
 

A facility, generally on the waterfront, that stores and services boats in berths, on moorings, 
and in dry storage or dry stack storage.  

 
1.2.2.  Pier  
 

A structure extending over the water and supported on a fixed foundation (fixed pier), or on 
flotation (floating pier), that provides access to the water. A structure, usually of greater 
length than width and projecting from the shore into a body of water with direct ac-
cess from land, that can be either open deck or provided with a superstructure. 

 
1.2.3.  Fixed Pier  
 

Pier constructed on a permanent, fixed foundation, such as on piles, that permanently es-
tablishes the elevation of the structure deck with respect to land. 

 
1.2.4.  Floating Pier 
 

Pier designed with inherent flotation capability that allows the structure to float on the wa-
ter surface and rise and fall with water level changes. 

 
1.2.5.  Covered Pier  
 

A fixed or floating pier that is provided with a roof system to protect berthed boats from 
the weather. 

 
1.2.6.  Wharf  
 

A structure at the shoreline that has a platform built along and parallel to a body of water 
with either an open deck or a superstructure. 

 
1.2.7.  Boatyard 
 

A facility used for constructing, repairing, servicing, hauling from the water, storing (on land 
and in water), and launching of boats. 

 
1.2.8.  Berth 
 

The water space to be occupied by a boat or other vessel alongside or between bulkheads, 
piers, piles, fixed and floating docks or any similar access structure. 

 
1.2.9.  Slip 
 

A berthing space between or adjacent to piers, wharves, or docks; the water areas associat-
ed with boat occupation. 

Any place where a boat is wet stored or berthed. 

 
1.2.10.  Mooring(s) 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1253 of 13481.2. Marinas 

 
1.2.11.  Substructure 
 

That portion of the construction below and including the deck immediately above the wa-
ter.  

 
1.2.12.  Superstructure 
 
 
1.2.13.  Marine Terminal 
 

The portion of the construction of a pier or wharf above the deck. 

A facility comprised of one or more berths, piers, wharves, loading and unloading areas, 
warehouses, and storage yards and used for transfer of people and/or cargo between wa-
terborne and land transportation modes. 

 
1.2.14.  Terminal Yard 
 

Open areas at a marine terminal site that are provided for the temporary storage of car-
go, containers, and cargo-handling equipment. Solid-fill-type wharves that are contiguous 
to, and form a part of yard areas shall be considered a part of the terminal yard. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1254 of 1348 

1.3. Boats and Motor Craft 

 

1.3.1.  Motor Craft 
 
 
1.3.2.  Machinery Space  
 

Any boat that is propelled by other than wind or human power. 

Spaces that contain permanently installed engines for mechanical or electrical power or pro-
pulsion. 

 
1.3.3.  Ignition Source  
 

Any item or substance capable of an energy release of a type and magnitude sufficient to ignite 
any flammable mixture of gases or vapors that could occur onboard the vessel. 

 
1.3.4.  Personal Watercraft 
 

A vessel less than 4 m in length that uses an internal combustion engine powering a water jet 
pump as its primary source of propulsion and is designed to be operated by a person or per-
sons sitting, standing, or kneeling on rather than within the confines of the hull. 

 
1.3.5.  Accessible  
 

Capable of being reached for inspection, maintenance or removal without disturbing the per-
manent hull structure. 

A product that is transported for trade and not used for the vessel’s operation. 

 
1.3.6.  Cargo 
 
 
1.3.7.  Deck.  
 
 
1.3.8.  Deck Covering 
 

A horizontal division in a vessel’s structure. 

A material applied to a deck for purposes of increasing the fire or thermal endurance of the 
deck. 

 
1.3.9.  Joiner Construction 
 

Nonstructural partitions used to subdivide compartments, such as bulkhead panels, doors, win-
dows, insulation, ceilings, connectors, and interior finishes. 

 
1.3.10. Lining 
 

Structural components, such as suspended ceilings or curtain bulkheads, which are non–load-
bearing or used for aesthetic purposes. 

 
1.3.11. Towboat (Tugboat)  
 

A towing vessel is vessel that is engaged in pulling, pushing, hauling along side or a combina-
tion thereof to tow away the boat in emergency. 

 
1.3.12. Survival Craft  
 

Craft capable of sustaining the lives of persons in distress after abandoning the vessel on which 
they were originally carried. 

Generic Arabic term for a sailing vessel. 

 
1.3.13. Dhow  
 
 
1.3.14. Vessel  
 

 

Watercraft of any type. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1255 of 1348 

2.  Marinas (Marina, Boat yards, Marine Terminals and      

Terminal Yards) 
 

2.1.  Intention 

2.1.1.  Though the services provided by a marina are those generally associated with active 

boat use,  such as berthing of boats, fueling, sanitary sewage pump out, seasonal boat 
storage or short-term storage, seasonal boat painting, boat engine maintenance, refu-
eling and voyage repairs. Servicing of a greater nature is generally associated with 
boatyard facilities. A marina can also incorporate recreational facilities, ship's stores, 
offices, restaurants or other upland amenities. For the purpose of addressing the fire 
and life safety issues for marinas in this code, the term “Marina” is used as generic 
term and also covers boatyards, repair workshops, marine terminals and terminal 
yards. 

 
2.1.2.  However, this chapter does not cover the Tanker 

moorage, pipeline transfers, storage of flammable 
liquids, LPG, LNG and similar products in marine 
tankers, fire and life safety of cruise ships, com-
mercial vessels and deep sea ship fires.  

  
2.1.3. 

 The marina requirements in this code are to ad-
dress the following. 

 

2.1.3.1.  An efficient fire access way to marinas, 
boat yards, marine terminals and termi-
nal yards is provided for Civil Defence 
access during emergencies.  

 
2.1.3.2.  Adequate fixed fire protection systems 

Did You Know? 

Almost all marina fires 

start initially on the 

vessel itself. But the 

complexity in marina 

fire access and delay 

in separating vessel 

on fire from the marina 

results in a violent and 

devastating fire. 

are available at marinas to tackle loading/
unloading area fires on shore or vessels and boat fires at marinas.  
 

2.1.3.3.  To provide minimum construction, fire and life safety guidelines for marinas, 

boat yards, marine terminals and terminal yards to protect life and proper-
ties. 

 
 2.1.3.4.  To provide minimum fire and life safety guidelines for marina operators and 

yacht owners to be observed on marinas, on board boats, yachts, dhows, 
and vessels. 

 

2.2.  Fundamental approach 

 
2.2.1.  Following are the basic approaches that Civil Defence insists marina management, 

boat owners and marine customers for fire and life safety at marinas. 

 

 

2.2.1.1.  Comply with basic fire safety rules on vessels, boats, yachts and dhows. 
  
2.2.1.2.  Provide Civil Defence access road, waterfront access to marinas and provide 

fixed fire protection systems.  

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1256 of 13482.2.1.3.  Limit the fire to the space and deck of origin using appropriate on board fire 

extinguishers and fixed fire hydrants of marina. 

 
2.2.1.4.  Marina operators shall have written fire strategy, emergency response plan, 
rules and regulations for regular inspections, maintenance and house keep-
ing requirements of vessels, boats, yachts, dhows, marina and storage yards. 

 
2.2.1.5.  Marina operators shall have equipment and methods to tow away the vessel 

on fire from rest of the moored vessels, to mitigate the spread of fire. 

 
2.2.1.6.  Limit the fire to the space, area or deck of origin.  
  

2.2.3.  The requirements in this chapter are the minimum guidelines. It is the responsibility of 

vessel designers, consultants, contractors, vessel owners and marina operators to re-
fer to international standards and national regulations such as UAE Yachts Regulations 
(for yachts above 24 m), NFPA 1, NFPA 301, NFPA 302, NFPA 303, NFPA 306, NFPA 
307, NFPA 312 and ICC (Chapter 46), for further clarifications and code compliance. 

 
 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1257 of 1348 

3.  Construction of Marinas 

 
3.1. 

Construction of marinas shall comply with Table 20.1. 

Table 20.1: Construction of Marinas 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. PIERS AND 

WHARVES 

1.  SUBSTRUCTURE CONSTRUCTION 
 
i.  All new piers and wharves shall be reinforced concrete or equivalent construc-

tion.  

ii.  Where all new piers and wharves constructed of steel and steel piles, shall be 

provided with fireproofing to provide a minimum of 2-hour fire resistance rating. 

iii. The existing non- concrete piers and wharves shall be upgraded to comply with 

Table 20.1.1.1.i. or Table 20.1.1.1.ii. by the end of year 2018. 

iv. Design, materials, and workmanship of pier and wharf construction shall con-
form to standards and construction practices that ensure a durable and safe 
structure that can withstand the forces of nature to which piers and wharves are 
likely to be exposed, including the deteriorating influences of the environment 
and the expected wear and tear of operation and use, so that a safe place is pro-
vided for all occupants. 

v.  Concrete or steel portions of pier or wharf structures that are exposed to impact 
or abrasion by vessels and are subject to damage by floating debris, shall be pro-
tected by an open-fender system constructed of non-combustible material as 
per  Chapter 1. 

vi. When used on the underside of the pier deck, vapor barriers, moisture shields, 

coatings or finishes shall conform to the definition of noncombustible or limited-
combustible as defined in Chapter 1. 

vii. Pier aprons or platforms built along the sides or ends of the pier shall have the 
substructure and deck constructed using reinforced concrete or equivalent con-
struction. 

 
2.   SUPERSTRUCTURE CONSTRUCTION 
 
i.  The type of material or combination of materials used in superstructure con-

struction shall meet the general construction provisions of Chapter 1. 

ii.  Exterior walls that are less than 9 m from other buildings or from property lines 

shall be constructed reinforced concrete or equivalent construction. 

iii. Exterior walls shall be provided with access to the building interior at intervals 

not exceeding 60 m for the use of fire fighters, guards and workers. 

 
 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1258 of 1348 

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

Table 20.1: Construction of Marinas 

2. TERMINAL 

BUILDINGS 

i.  Where terminal building is a superstructure, it shall comply with Table 20.1.1. 
ii.  Where, terminal buildings are not superstructures, they shall comply with con-

struction requirements as per Chapter 1. 

iii. All terminal buildings shall be separated from other buildings as necessary to 

minimize the effects of fire exposure, giving consideration to the construction, 
protection, and separation distances of the respective buildings. 

iv. Outside storage of cargo shall not be within 6 m of the exterior of the building. 
v.  Manufacturing, processing, repair, storage operations conducted on the premis-
es of marine terminals shall be confined to separate buildings that are designed, 
constructed, and protected for that purpose in accordance with Chapter 1 and 
Chapter 9. 

3. TERMINAL 

YARDS 

1.  YARD SURFACE 
 
i.  Where yards are situated on piers and wharves, the entire construction shall 

comply with Table 20.1.1. 

ii.  Yards shall be paved or otherwise surfaced to permit all-weather operations of 
heavy equipment with appropriate marking of roadways, access lanes, parking, 
and storage areas. 

iii. Yard shall not allow growth of vegetation. 
iv. Yards shall be paved or otherwise surfaced to facilitate spill containment and 

recovery of spills. 

v.  Private vehicle parking in marine terminals shall be permitted only in designated 

areas. 

vi. The entire property shall be surrounded by a fence or other means to prevent 

access by unauthorized persons. 

vii. Different categories of materials and cargo shall not be mixed and stored on 

terminal yard. 

i.  Where boats are berthed with the bow or the stern against piers, the piers shall 
be provided with separation between such berths measuring minimum of 5 m in 
width, after approximately a distance of 10 boats (approximately  30 m) 

ii.  Each berth shall be arranged such that a boat occupying the berth can be re-

moved in an emergency without the necessity of moving other boats. 

iii.  Where the lay-up berth (vessels declared laid up, requiring restoration, repair or 

maintenance) is adjacent to a wharf, pier or other land-connected structure, it 
shall be free from exposure to potential fire and explosion hazards and provide 
ready access for fire-fighting equipment. 

iv. Access to all piers, floats, and wharves shall be provided for municipal fire-

fighting equipment. 

4. BERTHS 

5. REPAIR 

i.  Construction shall comply with relevant codes of Chapter 1. Construction. 

WORKSHOPS 

6. WAREHOUSES 

7. ANCILLIARY 

BUILDINGS 

8. FUEL DIS-

PENSING ARE-

AS 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1259 of 1348 

4.  Fire Service Vehicle, Fireboat and Personnel Accessibility 

 
4.1. 

 

Fire service vehicle and personnel accessibility of marinas shall comply with                        
Table 20.2. 

Table 20.2.: Fire service vehicle and personnel accessibility  

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. PIERS AND 

i.  All piers and wharves shall be provided with Civil Defence vehicle access in 

WHARVES 

compliance with Chapter 2. Fire service vehicle and personnel accessibility. 
ii.  No portion of the pier or wharf shall be in excess of 60 m from the fire access 

road. 

iii.  Fire access for Civil Defence fireboats shall also be provided in accordance 

with Chapter 2., Section 3. Fire Access for Civil Defence Fireboats. 

iv. A dedicated berth measuring 15 m long and 5 m in width shall be reserved for 

the Civil Defence fireboats for docking during emergencies. 

v.  The Civil Defence shall have access to fenced, gated, or locked grounds or 

piers. 

vi. In coordination with marina operators, appropriate means of access such as 
keys, cardkeys or combinations shall be provided to the Civil Defence or shall 
be permitted to be secured in a lock box on the premises accessible to the 
Civil Defence. 

2. TERMINAL 

i.  Buildings shall be provided with Civil Defence vehicle access in compliance 

with Chapter 2. Fire service vehicle and personnel accessibility. 

BUILDINGS 

3. BOATYARDS 

4. REPAIR AND 

MAINTENANCE 

BUILDINGS 

5. TERMINAL 

i.  The terminal yard shall be provided with Civil Defence vehicle access in com-

YARD 

pliance with Chapter 2. Fire service vehicle and personnel accessibility. 

ii.  Access for fire-fighting operations shall be provided by means of fire lanes 

spaced at intervals so that no portion of any storage or parking area is over          
15 m.  

iii. Fire lanes that are U-shaped, do not exceed 90 m in length and are adjacent 
to cargo piled less than 5 m high shall be permitted to be of 4 m in width. All 
other fire lanes and access roads shall be a minimum of 6 m in width and in 
accordance with Chapter 2. Fire service vehicle and personnel accessibility. 
iv. Multiple number of entry gates, not less than 4.5 m in width shall be provid-

ed in the surrounding fence or other barriers to permit access of fire appa-
ratus in case of fire.  

v.  Fire access for Civil Defence fireboats shall also be provided at the waterfront 

in accordance with Chapter 2., Section 3. Fire Access for Civil Defence Fire-
boats. 

vi. A dedicated berth measuring 15 m long and 5 m in width shall be reserved for 

the Civil Defence fireboats for docking during emergencies. 

 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1260 of 1348 

5.  Operational Requirements for Marina Management 

 
5.1. 

Operational and management requirements for marinas shall comply with                        
Table 20.3. 

Table 20.3.: Operation and Management of Marinas  

ITEMS 

1REQUIREMENTS 

1.  MARINA           

MANAGEMENT 

AND                    

OPERATOR’S    

RESPONSIBILITY 

 

1. GENERAL 
 
i.  While code compliant design of the marina can reduce certain hazards and 

risks, the fact remains that proper management of the facility is an important 
element for reducing the risk of fire at marinas. 

ii.  The marina operators and management shall adopt procedures, prepare 

emergency action plan, inspection routines and maintenance verification pro-
cedures to demonstrate that the facility and equipment are complaint to this 
code. 

 
2. PERMIT TO OWNERS 
 
i.  The marina management shall not allow any boats into their marinas to be 

berthed without issuing a permit to the owner. 

ii.  Such a permit shall be issued only after verifying and receiving a copy of the 

following.   
a.  Certification of Compliance of the boat to UAE yacht regulations. 
b.  Valid license for the boat and the owner. 
c.  Valid insurance for the boat and the owner.  
d.  Valid annual safety inspection report for the boat, issued by authorized 

inspection and maintenance agency. 

e.  Valid annual inspection report of the fire detection, extinguishers and 

protection systems of the boat, issued by Civil Defence approved inspec-
tion and maintenance agency. 

f.  Undertaking from the owner to abide by the fire and safety regulations of 

the marina operator, such as but not limited to ‘no live cooking on 
board’, ‘no Sheesha on board’ and ‘no barbeque on board’ .  

g.  Undertaking from the owner to abide by the speed limit of 3 nautical 

miles at the marinas, boatyards and terminals.  

iii.  The marina operator shall visually inspect the boat to verify good condition 

of the boat prior to issuing the permit. 

   
3. FIREBOATS AND TOWING BOATS 

 

i.  It is marina management responsibility to be self sufficient with a minimum 

of one fireboat fully equipped with the following. 
a.  A fixed fire pump of not less than 1250 gpm, capable of delivering 6.9 bar 

pressure, necessary hose with nozzles. 

b.  A fixed foam extinguisher, with minimum capacity of 150 Ltr., with neces-

sary hose and nozzles. 

c.  A fixed multipurpose dry powder extinguisher, with a minimum capacity 

of 50 kg, with necessary hose and nozzle. 

d.  A fixed CO2 fire extinguisher, with a minimum of 20 kg capacity, with nec-

essary hose and nozzle. 

ii.  It is marina management responsibility to be self sufficient with a towboat 

having a minimum capacity required to tow away the biggest vessel that the 
management permits in their marina. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1261 of 1348 

 

Table 20.3.: Operation and Management of Marinas  

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. MARINA           

MANAGEMENT 

AND                   

OPERATOR’S 

RESPONSIBILITY 

 

4. VESSEL REPAIR, MAINTENANCE AND RE-FUELING WORKS 
 
i. 

The marina management shall have an inspection made of each boat re-
ceived for major repair at workshop or at berth or for storage as soon as 
practicable after arrival of the boat and before commencement of repair 
or maintenance work aboard. 

ii.  Presence of combustible vapors in any compartment shall be checked. 
iii.  General maintenance and cleanliness, and location of any combustible 

materials that require removal or protection for the safe accomplishment 
of the particular work involved shall be done. 

iv.  Quantity, type, and apparent condition of fire-extinguishing equipment 

v. 

onboard shall be inspected. 
Listed and appropriate shore power inlet(s) and ship-to-shore cable(s) 
shall be ensured. 

vi.  The management shall, as a condition to accepting a boat, require the 

owner to correct any inadequacies found or to authorize management to 
do so. 

vii.  Smoking in the working area shall be prohibited.  
viii.  Loose combustibles in the area of any hazardous work shall be removed. 
ix.  Unprotected battery terminals shall be covered to prevent inadvertent 
shorting from dropped tools or otherwise and the ungrounded battery 
lead shall be disconnected.  
Personnel employed in the removal or installation of storage batteries 
shall be qualified.  

x. 

xi.  Where electric service is provided to boats in storage, the receptacle 

providing the power shall be protected with a ground-fault circuit inter-
rupter.  

xii.  The marina operator shall post in a prominent location or provide to boat 

operators using a marina or boatyard for mooring, repair, servicing, or 
storage, a list of safe operating procedures stating clearly that  use of any 
form of hibachis, charcoal, wood, or gas-type portable cooking equip-
ment, except in specifically authorized areas is prohibited. 

xiii.  Fueling procedures shall be posted and handed over to the customers 

which should clearly state the following. 
a.  Stop all engines and auxiliaries 
b.  Shut off all electricity, open flames, and heat sources  
c.  Check bilges for fuel vapors 
d.  Extinguish all smoking materials  
e.  Close access fittings and openings that could allow fuel vapors to en-

ter the boat's enclosed spaces 

f.  Remove all personnel from the boat except the person handling the 

fueling hose 

xiv. During fueling the following procedures shall be followed. 

a.  Maintain nozzle contact with fill pipe 
b.  Attend fuel-filling nozzle at all times 
c.  Wipe up spills immediately 
d.  Avoid overfilling 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1262 of 1348 

 
 
 

ITEMS 

Table 20.3.: Operation and Management of Marinas  

REQUIREMENTS 

1. MARINA           

MANAGEMENT 

AND                   

OPERATOR’S 

RESPONSIBILITY 

4. VESSEL REPAIR, MAINTENANCE AND RE-FUELING WORKS 
 
xv.    Welding, brazing, soldering, and metal cutting operations shall be per-

formed in a shop specifically provided for the purpose or in an open area. 

xvi.   Such shop, including its flooring, shall be of noncombustible or fire-

resistive construction.  

xvii.  Combustibles shall be kept at an approved distance away from the shop 

or area. 

xviii. When welding or metal cutting in or on a boat, the following precautions 

shall be taken  
a  Before operations are started, a fire watch equipped with applicable 

fire extinguishers shall be established.  

b  Removable combustible materials in proximity to hazardous repair 

work shall be moved to a safe location aboard or ashore.  

c  Noncombustible material or approved flameproof tarpaulins shall be 

used to protect combustible materials that cannot be moved.  

d  Combustible vapor and flammable liquid shall not be in the hot work 

area.  

e  Means shall be provided to prevent sparks from passing through 

openings, such as hatches, ports and tank openings. 

f  Noncombustible material, approved flameproof tarpaulins, or metal 
shields shall be set around the work in progress to restrict the travel 
of sparks to other areas.  

g  Before welding or metal cutting is begun on decks or bulkheads, per-
sonnel shall inspect conditions on the opposite side thereof and shall 
determine that the operations will not cause damage by heat or fire. 
h  Fuel tanks shall be safeguarded to prevent vapors from creating a fire 

hazard.  

 
5. HOUSEKEEPING 
 
i. 

The marina shall be kept clean all the time, free of vegetation, garbage, 
discarded plastics, debris, waste materials and combustibles. 

ii.  Debris and waste materials shall be kept in metal containers and re-

moved or emptied at sufficiently frequent intervals to prevent dangerous 
accumulations. 

 
6. RISK ASSESSMENT AND EVALUATION  
 
i. 

It is the marina management’s responsibility to conduct a comprehensive 
fire risk assessment of the new, existing and under construction marinas 
to identify the fire risks, non-compliances and safety violations. 
The marina management shall upgrade their marinas, fire fighting equip-
ment, fire fighting systems, operating procedures, training of the staff, 
emergency action plans and life safety systems to comply with this code 
by the end of year 2018. 

ii. 

 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1263 of 1348 

 

Table 20.3.: Operation and Management of Marinas  

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  MARINA           

MANAGEMENT 

AND                    

OPERATOR’S    

RESPONSIBILITY 

 

7. ELECTRICAL HAZARDS AND SAFETY 
 
i.  Electrical systems and electrical equipment in the marina and boatyard re-
quire special consideration from marina management because of the exist-
ence of wet locations, dampness, rain, atmospheric moisture and severe 
corrosive conditions. 

ii.  All electrical materials, devices, appliances, fittings, and other equipment 
shall be listed or labeled by a qualified testing agency, approved by local 
power distribution authority and shall be installed and connected in accord-
ance with listing requirements and/or manufacturer's instructions. 

iii.  A bench mark indicating the electrical datum plane of the land area shall be 

permanently located on shore in the marina or boatyard.  

iv.  Electrical services shall be disconnected from the power source when the 

water level reaches the bench mark for the electrical datum plane.  

v.  All electrical connections shall be located at least 305 mm above the deck of 

a floating pier.  

vi.  All electrical connections shall be located at least 305 mm above the deck of 

a fixed pier but not below the electrical datum plane. 

vii.  Poles or structures used to support electrical service, feeder, or branch cir-

cuit shall be used only for that purpose. 

viii. All cable connections shall be in accordance with NFPA 70, National Electri-

cal Code. 

ix.  Primary power, when introduced in excess of 230 V phase to phase, shall be 
transformed to reduce the marina or boatyard electrical system to be not in 
excess of 230 V phase to phase unless engineered and the system has been 
approved by the local power distribution authority. 

x.  The bottom of enclosures for transformers shall not be located below the 

electrical datum plane. 

xi.  Service equipment, including service disconnecting equipment, meters, and 

associated equipment, and the main switchboard or panel, shall not be in-
stalled in wet locations unless listed for wet locations. 

xii.  Where auxiliary emergency or optional standby power supply equipment is 

provided, the standby electrical system shall be designed, installed, and 
maintained as required by the local power distribution authority. 

xiii. The engine and generator shall be housed in a well-ventilated, fire-resistive 
enclosure that shall contain only the auxiliary power unit and the necessary 
controls 

xiv. The means and methods of grounding the non-current-carrying metal parts 
of the electrical system and for equipment and portable appliances connect-
ed thereto, metal poles, metal supports that carry electrical cables etc. shall 
comply with the requirements of Articles 250 and 555 of NFPA 70, National 
Electrical Code. 

xv.  Wiring electrical equipment and materials installed on piers, wharves, 

docks, or similar locations, and wiring methods shall specifically conform to 
the requirements of Article 555 and any other applicable requirements of 
NFPA 70, National Electrical Code 

xvi. Electrical wiring shall be installed in such a way as to avoid possible contact 

with masts and other parts of boats being moved in the yard. 

xvii.All the electrical designs, installations, material specifications, approvals, 

inspections and operations shall be in accordance with local power distribu-
tion authority. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1264 of 1348 

 

Table 20.3.: Operation and Management of Marinas  

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. MARINA           

MANAGEMENT 

AND                   

OPERATOR’S 

RESPONSIBILITY 

 

8. TRAINING 
 
i.  It is marina management’s responsibility to hire qualified and professional 
personnel for their operation, administration and maintenance purposes. 
ii.  The marina management employees shall be trained continuously on fire 

and life safety requirements for marina operations. 

iii. Such training shall be acquired by authorized and qualified professional 

training institutions who offer certifications. 

iv. Each employee shall be instructed in the procedures for responding to a 
fire, responding to a fire alarm, and reporting a fire to the proper authori-
ties (and to designated facility employees), as well as the employee's desig-
nated role(s) in prefire planning matters. 

v.  Designated and first responder employees shall be trained in yard hydrant 

usage, laying of hose, fire pumps, standpipe systems, wheel-mounted ex-
tinguishers and auxiliary water sources  in coordination with Civil Defence. 
vi. All employees, including office personnel, shall be given training in the use 

of portable fire extinguishers. 

vii. All employees shall know the location and usage of appropriate fire-

fighting equipment. 

viii. All employees shall be well versed with the “Emergency Action Plan” pre-
pared in accordance with applicable strategies of Chapter 19. Emergency 
Action Plan and Evacuation Procedures” along with the following consid-
erations. 
a.  Nature of the hazards involved at marinas. 
b.  Types and location of vessels berthed in the marinas. 
c.  Location of communication equipment, hydrants, extinguishers, water 

sources and other emergency response equipment. 

d.  Designated personnel with their specific roles. 
 

  9. LIASON WITH CIVIL DEFENCE 
 
i.  Marina management shall be in a continuous coordination with Civil De-

fence to familiarize the Civil Defence with access points, changes in the fa-
cility and their emergency action plans. 

ii.  Marina management shall assist the Civil Defence in prefire planning for 

the following. 
a.  Entries and access routes for equipment within the premises  
b.  Location, construction, use and accessibility of all buildings and all 

their subdivisions including basements and storage lockers.  

c.  Location and extent of outside working areas.  
d.  Location and means of access to both dry and wet boat storage areas.  
e.  Type and capacity of water lines on piers and walkways, including all 
points where connection of hydrant or pumper supplies can be affect-
ed.  

f.  Types and capacities of facility equipment, including work or tow 

boats, fire pumps, pier-mounted hose cabinets and all portable fire 
extinguishers.  

g.  Voltages and capacities of electrical systems and location of electrical 

disconnecting means. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1265 of 1348 

 

Table 20.3.: Operation and Management of Marinas  

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1.  MARINA           

MANAGEMENT 

AND                    

OPERATOR’S    

RESPONSIBILITY 

10. FIRE WATCH 
 
i.  Fire watch person shall be employed on a 24 hour basis. 
ii.  The route shall be laid out to include every important and potentially hazard-

ous area within the premises. 

iii. Important and potentially hazardous areas shall be incorporated in a recog-
nized watch person's recording system, such as a portable watch clock or a 
computerized reporting system. 

iv. The watch person's first round shall consist of a complete inspection immedi-

ately at the close of the working day. 

v.  Subsequent rounds shall be scheduled so that the interval between visiting 

each area shall not exceed 1 hour. 

   
11. SMOKING  AND OTHER RESTRICTIONS 
 
i.  Smoking shall be prohibited in the following areas. 

a.  Fuel storage and dispensing areas. 
b.  Covered or enclosed boat storage or berthing areas. 
c.  Battery rooms 
d.  Terminal Yards 
e.  Workshops 
f.  Paint shops 
g.  Other locations identified as dangerous by the management 

ii.   Signs, posters, or posted instructions shall be provided where practicable to 

remind the owners, guests and public of basic fire safety practices and to 
warn of unusual or extreme fire hazards. 

iii.  All boat owners at the marina shall be provided with written instructions for 
reporting fires and other emergencies and actions to be taken in the event of 
a fire.  

iv.  Open-flame devices used for lighting or decoration shall not be used on a 

vessel, a float, pier or bulkhead unless approved by the authority having juris-
diction 

 
12. MAINTAINANCE 
 
i.  A maintenance program that requires periodic inspection, testing and opera-
tion of fireboats, towboats, fire-fighting equipment and systems and ensures 
access to all parts of the facility for fire-fighting personnel shall be adopted.  
ii.  All fire-fighting equipment and systems shall be inspected and tested at regu-

lar intervals.  

iii. Fire extinguishers shall be inspected at least annually and provided with a tag 

showing the last date of inspection.  

iv. Fire extinguishers shall be emptied at the end of their service period. 
v.  Hoses shall be unrolled, inspected and tested in accordance with the manu-

facturer's instructions at least once a year. 

vi. All electrical equipment, CCTV, Fire detection and alarm system, communica-
tion systems, control systems and emergency equipment shall be maintained 
at regular intervals. 

vii. Wear and tear of piers and wharves shall be inspected and necessary repair 

measures shall be taken. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1266 of 1348 

6.  Storage Requirements 

 
6.1. 

Outdoor and indoor storage of materials at marinas shall comply with Table 20.4. 

Table 20.4.: Storage Requirements at Marinas  

ITEMS 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. GENERAL 

i.  The loading, unloading, handling, and storage of hazardous materials is an 

inherent part of most marine terminal operations. Particular attention 
should be given to facilities, procedures and operations that minimize dan-
gerous concentrations, avoid the mixing of incompatible materials, ensure 
safe operations and permit effective fire control in the event of an acci-
dent.  

ii.  Tanker moorage, pipeline transfer, storage of flammable liquids, liquefied 
natural gas, liquefied petroleum gas shall not be handled with general car-
go marine terminal operations or general marina. 

iii. Outside storage of cargo shall not be within 6 m of the exterior of the 

building.  

iv. Hazardous material storage, cargo handling, container spacing, cargo area 

limitations, bulk cargo operations, aisle arrangements at terminal yards etc. 
shall comply with NFPA 307. Standard for the Construction and Fire Protec-
tion of Marine Terminals, Piers, and Wharves. 

v.   Flammable and combustible liquids shall be stored, used and handled in 
accordance with Chapter 13. Flammable and Combustible Liquid Usage. 

vi. Fuel dispensing shall comply with Chapter 13. Flammable and Combustible 

Liquid Usage. 

vii. Liquefied Petroleum Gas shall be stored and installed in accordance with 

Chapter 11. Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code of Practice. 

2. BATTERY 

i.  Where due to size and weight the removal of batteries for storage or 

charging is impractical, batteries shall be permitted to remain onboard pro-
vided the following conditions are met: 
a.  The battery compartment is arranged to provide adequate ventilation. 
b.  A listed battery charger is used to provide a suitable charge. 
c.  The power connection to the charger consists of a three-wire cord of 

not less than No. 14 AWG conductors connected to a source of 110 V to 
125 V single-phase current, with a control switch and approved circuit 
protection device designed to trip at not more than 125 percent of the 
rated amperage of the charger. 

d.  There is no connection on the load side of the charger to any other de-

vice except the battery, and the boat battery switch is turned off. 

e.  The battery is properly connected to the charger, and the grounding 

conductor effectively grounds the charger enclosure. 

f.  Unattended battery chargers are checked at intervals not exceeding 8 

hours while in operation. 

 
 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1267 of 1348 

7.  Fire Protection System Requirements 

 
7.1. 

Fire protection systems for marinas shall comply with Table 20.5. 

Table 20.5.: Marinas Fire Protection Systems 

OCCUPANCY  SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 

1. PIERS AND 

WHARVES 

 

 

2. COVERED 

PIERS AND 

WHARVES 

 

1. PIERS AND WHARVES 
 
i.  Yard hydrant system shall be provided 

along the wharves and piers as per 
Chapter 9. Section 3.11. 

ii.  No pier, wharf or building portion shall 

be in excess of 60 m from a yard hy-
drant. 

iii. Hydrant network need not be looped. 
iv. Trolley type foam fire extinguishers  

shall be provided along the marinas at 
60 m intervals. 

v.  The equipment and cabinet shall be 

approved for outdoor application. 

 
2.  BUILDINGS ON PIERS AND WHARVES 
HAVING TOAL BUILT UP-AREA MORE 
THAN 230 m2 AND/OR BUILT-UP   AR-
EA OF INDIVIDUAL BUILIDNG IS MORE 
THAN 46 m2 OR BUILDINGS ARE LESS 
THAN 9 m FROM ADJACENT                
BUILDING 

 
i.  Automatic sprinklers shall be provided 

in all buildings as per Chapter 9. Sec-
tion 3.5. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be 

0.30 gpm with area of sprinkler opera-
tion of 2500 ft2 (232 m2). 

iii. Dry riser or Hose reel system shall not 

be required. 

1. COVERED PIERS AND WHARVES 
 
i.  Yard hydrant system shall be provided 

along the wharves and piers as per 
Chapter 9. Section 3.11. 

ii.  No area shall be in excess of 60 m from 

a yard hydrant. 

iii. Hydrant network need not be looped. 
iv. Automatic sprinklers shall be provided 

in covered piers and wharves as per 
Chapter 9. Section 3.5. 

v.  The sprinkler design density shall be 

0.30 gpm with area of sprinkler opera-
tion of 2500 ft2 (232 m2). 

vi. Dry riser or Hose reel system shall not 

be required. 

vii. Trolley type foam fire extinguishers  

shall be provided along the fire access 
road at 120 m intervals. 

viii.The equipment and cabinet shall be 

approved for outdoor application. 

FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

1. PIERS AND WHARVES 
 
i.  The capacity of the fire pump set for 
hydrant system shall be 1000 gpm at 
a pressure as required to satisfy 6.9 
bar at the most remote hydrant 
valve. 

ii.  The water tank shall have a capacity 

of 90 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection and 
instantaneous refilling arrangement. 

 
 
 
 
2.  BUILDINGS ON PIERS AND 

WHARVES HAVING TOAL BUILT UP-
AREA MORE THAN 230 m2 AND/OR 
BUILT-UP   AREA OF INDIVIDUAL 
BUILIDNG IS MORE THAN 46 m2 OR 
BUILDINGS ARE LESS THAN 9 m 
FROM ADJACENT                BUILDING 

 
i.  The fire pump and fire water tank 

feeding hydrant system in accordance 
with Table 20.3.1.1. shall be sufficient 
to serve the sprinkler system. 

ii.  Where there is danger of damage to 

sprinkler, piping or equipment by 
floating objects, physical barrier shall 
be provided to exclude such objects. 

1. COVERED PIERS AND WHARVES 
 
i.  The capacity of the fire pump set for 
hydrant system shall be 1000 gpm at 
a pressure as required to satisfy 6.9 
bar at the most remote hydrant 
valve. 

ii.  The water tank shall have a capacity 

of 90 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection and 
instantaneous refilling arrangement. 
iii. Where there is danger of damage to 

sprinkler, piping or equipment by 
floating objects, physical barrier shall 
be provided to exclude such objects. 

iv. Sprinklers shall be of corrosion-

resistant type. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1268 of 1348 

Table 20.5.: Marinas Fire Protection Systems 

OCCUPANCY  SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

COMBINED FIRE PUMP SET AND 

FIRE WATER TANK CAPACITIES 

i.  The capacity of the fire pump set for 

hydrant system shall be 1000 gpm at a 
pressure as required to satisfy 6.9 bar 
at the most remote hydrant valve. 

ii.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 
120 minutes of operation, with supple-
mentary refilling arrangement for addi-
tional 120 minutes, complete with low 
water level detection and instantane-
ous refilling arrangement. 

3. TERMINAL 

YARD 

i.  Yard hydrant system shall be provided 

along the wharves and piers as per 
Chapter 9. Section 3.11. 

ii.  No area shall be in excess of 60 m 

from a yard hydrant. 

iii. Hydrant network shall be looped in 

accordance with Chapter 9.            
Section 3.11. 

iv. There shall be a minimum of 4 

breeching inlets distributed along the 
fire access road, feeding the looped 
hydrant network. 

v.  Trolley type foam fire extinguishers  
shall be provided along the piers and 
wharves at 120 m intervals. 

vi. The equipment and cabinet shall be 

approved for outdoor application. 

 

4. TERMINAL 

BUILDINGS 

1.  BUILDINGS STORING BOATS ON 
RACKS OR BUILDINGS HAVING A 
BUILT UP-AREA OF MORE THAN      
465 m2  

1.  BUILDINGS STORING BOATS ON 
RACKS OR BUILDINGS HAVING A 
BUILT UP-AREA OF MORE THAN      
465 m2  

5. REPAIR 

AND 

MAINTE-

NANCE 

BUILDINGS 

 
i.  Automatic sprinklers shall be provid-
ed in all buildings as per Chapter 9. 
Section 3.5. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be 
0.30 gpm with area of sprinkler oper-
ation of 2500 ft2 (232 m2). 

iii. Wet riser + Hose reel system shall be 
provided throughout the building, as 
per Chapter 9. Section 3.4. where 
yard hydrant system is not provided. 

 
2.  BUILDINGS HAVING A BUILT UP-
AREA OF MORE THAN 3600 m2 

 
i.  Automatic sprinklers shall be provid-
ed in all buildings as per Chapter 9. 
Section 3.5. 

ii.  The sprinkler design density shall be 
0.30 gpm with area of sprinkler oper-
ation of 2500 ft2 (232 m2). 

iii. Yard hydrant system shall be provided 

along the wharves and piers as per 
Chapter 9. Section 3.11. 

iv. Wet riser system or hose reel system 

shall not be required. 

 
i.  The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be 1000 gpm at pressure as required to 
satisfy 4.5 bar at the most remote hose 
reel outlet valve. 

ii.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 

60 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, dedi-
cated direct breeching inlet and instan-
taneous refilling arrangement. 

 
 
2.  BUILDINGS HAVING A BUILT UP-AREA 

OF MORE THAN 3600 m2 

 
i.  The capacity of the fire pump set shall 

be 1250 gpm at pressure as required to 
satisfy 6.9 bar at the most remote hy-
drant outlet valve. 

ii.  The water tank shall have a capacity of 

90 minutes of operation, complete 
with low water level detection, dedi-
cated direct breeching inlet and instan-
taneous refilling arrangement. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1269 of 1348 

8.  Life Safety System Requirements 

 
8.1. 
 

Life Safety systems for marinas shall comply with Table 20.6. 

Table 20.6.: Life Safety Systems for Marinas 

SYSTEM 

LOCATION 

1. FIRE DETECTION 

AND ALARM 

SYSTEM 

 

 

2. CCTV 

i.  All enclosed rooms, spaces shall be provided with Automatic f ire detection 
and alarm system in accordance with Chapter 8. Fire Detection and Alarm 
Systems. 

ii.  All open spaces such as piers, wharves, terminal yards, boat yards shall be 

provided with manual pull stations or push button type fire alarm system in 
accordance with Chapter 8. Fire Detection and Alarm Systems. 

iii. All alarm signals shall be annunciated at the central command center of the 

marina operator’s or management office building at the marina. 

i.  All marinas, terminal yards and boatyards shall be provided with CCTV cam-

eras. 

ii.  CCTV footage shall be monitored by at the central command center of the 
marina operator’s or management office building at the marina, by the ma-
rina management’s designated employees. 

3. EMERGENCY 

LIGHTING 

i.  All buildings, piers, wharves, terminal yards, boat yards and marina areas 

shall be provided with outdoor type centrally monitored emergency 
lighting system in accordance with Chapter 6. Emergency Lighting. 

4. ILLUMINATION 

i.  Electrical lighting shall be provided to ensure adequate illumination of all 

exterior areas, piers, wharves and floats.  

ii.  Electrical lighting shall not interfere with navigation or aids to navigation.  
iii. Only listed 120/240 V AC electrical equipment shall be operated unattend-

ed. 

5. EMERGENCY   

NOTIFICATION    

VISUAL ALARM 

i.  An approved emergency notification visual alarm shall be provided for the 
marinas, boatyards and terminals such that the any emergency situations 
can be visually annunciated and notified to the customers on boats at mari-
nas and at the sea. 

6. SIGNAGE 

i.  Adequate emergency signage, warning signs, caution signs, fire safety in-
structions, ‘NO OPEN FLAME’ signs etc. shall be provided throughout the 
marinas. 

ii.  Emergency exit signage shall comply with Chapter 4. Exit Signs. 

 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1270 of 1348ANNEXURE 1 
FREQUENTLY ASKED 
QUESTIONS 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1271 of 13481. GENERAL 

QUESTION 

ANSWER 

Table A.1.1: FAQ-General 

1. Can materials be imported 

i.  No. All materials with respect to Fire and Life Safety systems are 

from outside UAE and in-
stalled without Civil De-
fence approval? 

required to be Civil Defence approved. 

ii.  A Civil Defence registered agent and distributer is required inside 
UAE (Not free zones) to sell Fire, Life Safety and construction ma-
terials. 

2. What is cross-listing? 

i.  Cross Listing refers to the certificate or conformity issued by the 

certification bodies to the primary manufacturer, where a materi-
al, product or system is manufactured in a certain primary factory 
at a certain primary location as a certain primary brand.  

ii.  And same certificate or conformity credentials are allowed and 
permitted to be used by a secondary manufacturer, in a second-
ary factory, at a secondary location, as a primary brand, claiming 
to abide by the quality, prerequisites, standards in an exact man-
ner that were applicable to the primary manufacturer  

3. What is multiple listing? 

i.  Multiple Listing refers to the certificate or conformity issued by 

the certification bodies to the primary manufacturer, where a 
material, product or system is manufactured in a certain primary 
factory at a certain primary location as a certain primary brand.  
ii.  And same certificate or conformity credentials are allowed and 
permitted to be used by another non-manufacturer as a second-
ary brand, claiming to abide by the quality, prerequisites, stand-
ards in an exact manner that were applicable to the primary man-
ufacturer and primary brand. 

i.  Please see Chapter 18, Table 18.4. for contractor’s (installation 

and maintenance) pre-requisites.  

i.  Please see Chapter 18, Table 18.8. for agent’s (installation and 

maintenance) pre-requisites.  

i.  Please see Chapter 18, Table 18.6. for house of expertise’ pre-

requisites.  

i.  Please see Chapter 18, Table 18.9. for laboratory’s pre-requisites.  

i.  Please see Chapter 18, Table 18.10. for certification body’s pre-

requisites.  

4. How many engineers and 
technicians do I need to 
function as contractor? 

5. How many engineers and 
technicians do I need to 
function as agent? 

6. How many engineers and 
technicians do I need to 
function as house of exper-
tise? 

7. How do I register with Civil 
Defence as material testing 
laboratory? 

8. How do I register with Civil 
Defence as conformity certi-
fication body? 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 12722. CONSTRUCTION 

 

QUESTION 

ANSWER 

Table A.1.2: FAQ-Construction 

1.  What is the fire rating for building 

i.  All structural members up to and including the floor of the 

having more than 2 basements?  

2. What is the definition of a Super 
high-rise building or structure?  

lowest level of discharge of underground buildings more 
than 7000 mm below and more than two level below the 
lowest level of exit discharge (i.e. All High depth Under-
ground Buildings or Structures) shall be at least 2 hours fire 
rated construction.  

i.  The occupancies or Multiple or Mixed occupancies, facili-

ties, buildings and structures having  total height of the 
ceiling of the occupiable or usable space of more than 90 m 
above the lowest grade or lowest level of Fire Service Ac-
cess for that occupancy is categorized as Superhighrise 
Building. 

3.  What is the definition of a high-

i.  The occupancies or Multiple or Mixed occupancies, facili-

rise building or structure?  

ties, buildings and structures having  total height of the 
ceiling of the occupiable or usable space of more than 23 m 
above the lowest grade or lowest level of Fire Service Ac-
cess for that occupancy is categorized as Highrise Building. 

4.  What is the definition of a midrise 

i.  The occupancies or Multiple or Mixed occupancies, facili-

building or structure?  

ties, buildings and structures having total height of the ceil-
ing of the occupiable or usable space between 15 m to 23 
m from the lowest grade or lowest level of Fire Service Ac-
cess into that occupancy is categorized as Midrise Building.  

5.  What is the definition of a low-rise 

i.  The occupancies or Multiple or Mixed occupancies, facili-

building or structure?  

ties, buildings and structures having total height of the ceil-
ing of the occupiable or usable space up to 15 m from the 
lowest grade or lowest level of Fire Service Access into that 
occupancy is categorized as Lowrise Building  

6.  What is the definition of a low 

i. 

depth structure or building?  

 A structure or a building with up to two basements or up 
to 7 m below the level of exit discharge, is categorized as 
Lowdepth building.  

7.  What is the definition of a high 

depth structure or building?  

8.  What is the fire rating and the 

minimum size of the Emergency 
Command Centre?  

i.  A structure or a building with more than two basements or 
more than 7 m below the level of exit discharge, is catego-
rized as Highdepth building 

i.  Fire command center or Emergency command center shall 
be minimum of 1 hour fire resistance rated with sprinkler 
protection and 2 hour fire resistance rated without sprin-
kler protection. And Fire Command Center shall have a 
minimum size of 19 m2 with minimum dimension of 3 m. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 12732. CONSTRUCTION 

QUESTION 

ANSWER 

Table A.1.2: FAQ-Construction 

9.  When can the separation between 
the kitchen and the dining area be 
exempted? 

i.  Separation requirement for kitchen could be exempted 

when kitchen is fully sprinklered and all the cooking facili-
ties in the kitchen are fitted with an approved extinguish-
ing system such as Kitchen hood suppression. Separation 
requirement for kitchen could also be exempted when an 
eating establishment is separated from other parts of the 
same building by walls and floors having fire resistance of 
at least 1 hour and doors having fire resistance of at least 
half an hour.  

ii.  Show/Open Kitchens shall be provided with 1 hour Fire 

rated Smoke partition (Glazing) to be separated from 
seating, open and circulation areas. 

10.  What is the maximum size of a 

i. 

kitchen allowed in a non-
sprinklered building ?  

11.  What is the fire rating for the 

i. 

separation between theatre, cine-
ma or concert hall from other 
parts of the building ?  

 For a non-sprinkler protected building, the floor area of 
the kitchen compartment shall not exceed 150 m².  

 A theatre, cinema or concert hall shall be separated from 
other parts of the same building, which is of a different 
purpose group, by compartment walls and floors having a 
fire resistance of at least 2-hour. If the building is protected 
by an automatic sprinkler system, the fire resistance rating 
of the compartment walls or floors can be reduced to 1-
hour. 

12. What is the fire rating for hotel 

i.  Each hotel bedroom shall be compartmented from adjoin-

bedrooms  

13. What is the fire rating for labor or 
staff accommodation bedroom ?  

14.  What are the kitchen fire rating 
requirements for a labor accom-
modation?  

ing rooms and other parts of the same building by con-
struction having fire resistance rating of at least 1 hour, 
irrespective of sprinkler protection. 

i.  Each labor or staff accommodation bedroom shall be com-
partmented from adjoining rooms and other parts of the 
same building by construction having fire resistance rating 
of at least 1-hour, irrespective of sprinkler protection. 

i.  Unless the building is sprinklered, kitchens are only al-

lowed on the ground floor and shall be enclosed with mini-
mum 1-hour fire resistance rated compartment wall, in-
cluding ½-hour fire rated door. Kitchen shall be separated 
by 1 hour fire rating and a protected corridor away from 
the sleeping area on the ground floor  

15.  What is the fire rating required 

i.  A motor vehicle workshop shall be separated from any oth-

for motor vehicle workshop  

er part of the same building by compartment walls and 
floors having fire resistance of not less than 2 hours if not 
sprinklered and 1 hour fire resistance if fully sprin-
klered. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 12742. CONSTRUCTION 

QUESTION 

ANSWER 

Table A.1.2: FAQ-Construction 

16.  What is the fire rating and venti-

i.  Areas in which spray painting or other allied processes are 

lation requirement for a spray 
painting booth or for any spray 
painting process  

performed or carried out, shall be separated from other 
parts of the same building by compartment walls and 
floors having fire resistance rating of not less than 2 hours 
without protection and 1 hour fire resistance rating if fully 
protected.  

ii.  Spray painting booths shall have built in vapor extraction 

system.  

17.  What is the fire rating of the cold 

i. 

room (freezer room) construc-
tion?  

 Where a cold room has a floor area exceeding 20 m², a 
separate outer layer of non-combustible construction, in-
cluding the door, having minimum 1-hour fire resistance 
rating with sprinkler protection and 2 hour fire resistance 
rating without sprinkler protection, shall be provided to 
compartmentalize the cold room enclosure from other are-
as.  

ii.  Provision of the fire resisting outer layer enclosure, includ-
ing the fire door to the cold room would not be required if 
the cold room has a floor area not exceeding 20 m² and is 
sprinkler protected. The storage materials shall not include 
highly flammable chemicals.  

iii. Cold room lesser than 20 m² provided with at least one 

hour fire rating compartment, need not be provided with 
sprinklers provided that the storage shall not include flam-
mable materials  .  

18.  What shall the maximum allowa-

i. 

ble area of a mezzanine floor ?  

 The aggregate area of mezzanines within a room, other 
than those located in special-purpose industrial occupan-
cies, shall not exceed one-third the open area of the room 
in which the mezzanines are located. 

19. What is the definition of fire ac-

i. 

cess level? 

 Level where Civil Defence Fire Appliances (Fire Truck/
Engine) are deployed and where fire fighters have direct 
access into the building.  

 20. What is the definition of fire en-

i. 

gine access road? 

 The road to the building or structure to allow approach 
and access for Civil Defence fire-fighting and rescue appa-
ratus.  

 21. What is the definition of fire en-

i.  The path adjacent to the building or structure to allow op-

gine access way  

erational setup for Civil Defence fire-fighting and rescue 
apparatus such as Aerial Appliances.  

22.  What is the gradient requirement 

for a fire engine access way  

i.  Access way shall be laid on a level platform or if on an in-
cline, the gradient shall not exceed a maximum of 10%.  

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 12752. CONSTRUCTION 

QUESTION 

ANSWER 

Table A.1.2: FAQ-Construction 

23.  What is the maximum allowable 

i.  Dead-ends in fire access way and fire access road shall not 

dead end distance for a fire en-
gine access way? 

exceed 45 m in length. 

ii.  If such dead ends exceed 45 m, turning facilities and ar-
rangements in accordance with Chapter 2. Fire Access, 
shall be provided. 

24.  What is the minimum height 

i. 

clearance along fire engine access 
way and access road?  

 Overhead clearance from obstructions such as entrance 
gate, link or bridges for fire access way and fire access road 
shall be at least 4.5 m.  

25.  In what type of building shall a 

i.  In any building which is classified as high-rise or High depth 

fire lift be required?  

building, there shall be at least one fire lift, which shall be 
contained within a separate protected shaft. 

26. What is the minimum dimension 

i.  Minimum dimension of a Fire lift car shall be of 2130 mm 

of a fire lift car? 

either in length of breadth. 

ii.  Fireman’s Lift car shall have a minimum size and arrange-
ment to accommodate ambulance stretcher of 610 mm X 
2130 mm. 

27. When do you need a fire lift lob-

by? 

i.  Fireman’s Lift Lobby shall be provided for all Superhighrise 
buildings., i.e., buildings with height more than 90 m from 
fire access level. 

 28. What is the minimum dimension 

i.  Fireman’s Lift Lobby shall be sized at 9 m2,  and where used 

of a fire lift lobby? 

as an occupant evacuation lift lobby, lift lobby shall be 
sized for occupant load factor of 0.28 m2 for 50 people and 
1 wheel chair space of 760 mm X 1220 mm. 

29.  What is the minimum width of a 

i.  Fire-fighting stairs should be a minimum of 1200 mm wide.  

fire fighting staircase? 

30. When shall an emergency com-

i.  Fire Command Center shall be provided to the following 

mand center be provided? 

occupancies. 

a. Highrise and Super highrise buildings. 
b. Malls. 
c. Amusement and Theme Parks 
ii.  Fire Command Center shall have a minimum size of 19 m2 

with minimum dimension of 3m. 

31. Where shall the emergency com-

i.  Emergency Command Center shall be located at the en-

mand center be located? 

trance side of the building and along fire accessway. 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 12762. CONSTRUCTION 

QUESTION 

ANSWER 

Table A.1.2: FAQ-Construction 

32.  What is the type of construction 
for exit staircase shaft based on 
the height of the building  

i.  Exit stairs serving Highrise buildings, Midrise buildings, 

High depth Underground buildings and buildings con-
necting four or more stories shall be constructed of RCC 
(Reinforced Concrete) with a minimum of 2 hour fire 
rating.  

ii.  Exit Stairs serving Lowrise buildings, Lowdepth Under-

ground buildings and buildings connecting Three or less 
stories shall be with 2 hour fire rated construction.  

 

 

 
 
 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 12773. EXITS 

QUESTION 

ANSWER 

Table A.2.3: FAQ– Exits 

1.    What is the swing direction 

i.  Doors required to be of the side-hinged or pivoted-swinging 

for doors for fire exits ?  

type shall swing in the direction of egress travel where serving a 
room or area with an occupant load of 50 or more. A door shall 
swing in the direction of egress travel under either of the fol-
lowing conditions. 

a. Where the door is used in an exit enclosure 
b. Where the door serves a high hazard contents area 

2.  Can spiral stairs be used for 

egress ?  

i.  Spiral Stairs is not allowed as a part of means of egress. 
ii.  Spiral stairs are permitted only to access mezzanines in mercan-

tile and as equipment access.  

3.  Can interlocking or scissor 

i.  No. Interlocking or scissor stairs are considered only as a single 

stair be treated as 2 staircases  

exit  

4.  What is the minimum separa-

tion distance between two        
exits?  

5.  What is the minimum clear 

width of a corridor or pas-
sageway  

i.  The minimum separation distance between two exits in a sprin-
klered building shall be not less than one-third  (1/3) the length 
of the maximum overall diagonal dimension of the building or 
area to be served.  

ii.  The minimum separation distance between two exits in a            
non-sprinklered building shall be not less than one-half (1/2)the 
length of the maximum overall diagonal dimension of the build-
ing or area to be served.  

i.  The minimum clear width of any corridor or passageway serving 
an occupant load of 50 or more shall be not less than 1200 mm 
in occupancies other than Schools and Hospitals. 

ii.  The minimum corridor width of schools and hospital shall not 

be less than 1800 mm. 

6. What is exit access? 

i.  That portion of a means of egress that leads to an exit.  

7. What is exit discharge? 

i.  That portion of a means of egress between the termination of 

an exit and a public way.  

8. What is exit passageway? 

i.  An Exit component that is separated from other spaces of a 

building or structure by fire resistance rated construction and 
opening protective, providing a protected path of egress travel 
in a horizontal direction to exit discharge or public way or out-
side building. Additional uses for the exit passageway include 
stair transfer in upper floors as well as to reduce travel distance 
to an exit by having an exit passageway lead to a stair of exit 
discharge.  

i.  An Exit component that may or may not be separated from oth-
er spaces of a building or structure by fire resistance rated con-
struction and opening protective, providing a path of egress 
travel in a horizontal direction to exit or exit passageway.  

9. What is exit corridor? 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 12784. FIRE AND LIFE SAFETY SYSTEMS 

Table A.2.4: FAQ– Fire and Life Safety Systems 

QUESTION 

ANSWER 

1.   At what level shall the fire 

pump be installed within the 
building?  

i.  Fire pumps shall be located on the ground floor along the fire 
access way or any below grade levels of the building with pro-
tected dedicated access from the fire access level. 

2.  At what level shall the interme-

diate fire pumps and water 
tanks be located for high-rise 
buildings?  

i.  Multilevel pump sets are not required in highrise buildings, 
unless they are Superhighrise buildings. Superhighrise build-
ings where multi-level pump sets are required, fire pumps and 
water tanks shall be located at not more than 90 m intervals 
from the first fire pump located at fire access level or the low-
er levels of the structure.  

3.  What is a breeching inlet  

i. 

 A connection through which the Civil Defence fire depart-
ment can pump supplemental water into the sprinkler sys-
tem, standpipe, or other system, furnishing water for fire ex-
tinguishment to supplement existing water supplies.  

4.  What is a landing valve  

i.  A 65 mm diameter water outlet normally located near the 
staircase in a Fire Hose Cabinet for trained or Civil Defence 
fire fighters to use during fire.  

5.  What is the maximum distance 
allowed between the edge of a 
fire engine access way and the 
breeching inlet  

i.  Buildings fitted with standpipes and automatic sprinkler sys-

tem shall have fire access ways for pumping appliances within 
18 m of the breeching inlet. The breeching inlets shall be visi-
ble from the access ways.  

6.  What is the spacing require-

i.  Spacing between Private Hydrants along Fire Engine access 

ment for private fire hydrants 
along fire engine access way 
and access road  

way shall be as follows. 

a. Occupancies other than storage and industrial shall be 120 m.                    
b. Light and Ordinary hazard Storage/Industrial occupancies shall 
be 100 m.                                                                                                                   
c. High Hazard storage and industrial occupancies shall be 60 m.                     
d. Logistics warehouse and Waste dumping lands shall be 60 m.  

7.  What is the minimum flow rate 

i. 

for each private fire hydrant  

 Minimum flow rate for each Private fire hydrant shall be 500 
Gallons per Minute. 

8.  What is the minimum pressure 

i.  Minimum Pressure required for Private fire hydrant is 6.9 bars  

required for fire hydrant? 

9.  What is the minimum duration 
of fire fighting water supply for 
private fire hydrant  

i.  Private Fire Hydrant Water supply for hazards other than high 

hazard occupancy shall be as per Chapter 9. 

ii.  Private Fire Hydrant Water supply for high hazard occupan-

cies shall be for 2 hours.  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 12794. FIRE AND LIFE SAFETY SYSTEMS 

Table A.2.4: FAQ– Fire and Life Safety Systems 

QUESTION 

ANSWER 

10.   Where can landing valves be 

i.  The landing valves shall be installed in a fire hose cabinet lo-

installed in a building? 

cated at exit corridors within 6 m of the exit stairs and fire lift 
lobbies, if any. 

11.   What is the length of cover-
age for one landing valve ?  

12.  What is the height require-

ment to install a portable fire 
extinguisher?  

i.  30 m is the maximum acceptable coverage of a landing valve.  

i.  The wall mount type portable fire extinguishers shall be in-
stalled in such a way that the top of the fire extinguisher is 
not more than 1.5 meters above the floor and not less than 30 
cm from the bottom of extinguisher to the finished floor  

13.  Where shall emergency lights 

i.  For all buildings except for One-and-Two-Family Dwelling, 

be provided? 

emergency lighting shall be provided. 

14.  What is the required lux level 

i.  Emergency lighting facilities shall be arranged to provide ini-

of emergency lights?  

15.  What type of occupancies re-
quire central battery system? 

16.  What type of occupancies re-

quire emergency voice evacua-
tion and communication sys-
tem? 

tial illumination that is not less than an average of 1 ft-candle 
(10.8 lux) and, at any point, not less than 0.1 ft-candle (1.1 
lux), measured along the path of egress at floor level.  

i.  The emergency lighting system shall be either Central Battery 
system or monitored type self contained emergency lighting 
system which is diagnostic type and  shall be automatically 
monitored and tested through the control unit. 

i.  Super highrise buildings  
ii.  Highrise buildings  
iii. Malls  
iv. Assembly occupancies  
v.  Amusement and theme parks  
vi. Educational occupancies  
vii.Hotel occupancies  
viii.Detention and correctional occupancies  
ix. Storage and industrial occupancies having built-up area more 
than 5000 m2  

17.  In what location are speakers 

i.  Speakers with flashers (strobe lights) shall be provided for 

with flashers required?  

18. What is the fire rating require-
ment for fire alarm and emer-
gency communication cables?  

basement car parks, mechanical or machine rooms, large ma-
chining areas of factories (more than 5000m²) and at locations 
where the ambient noise level is 75db or more.  

i.  2 hour fire rated cable or 2 hour fire rated dedicated enclo-

sure/shaft. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 12804. FIRE AND LIFE SAFETY SYSTEMS 

 

 

Table A.2.4: FAQ– Fire and Life Safety Systems 

QUESTION 

ANSWER 

19.   At what level above the 

i.  For raised floors 300 mm and above the floor level and/or 

ground for raised floors to 
have smoke detectors within 
the concealed space?  

containing combustible materials shall be provided with 
smoke detectors. 

20.   At what height between the 

i.  For suspended ceilings which are at or more than 800mm 

suspended ceiling and the 
ceiling level a smoke detector 
to be provided?  

from the ceiling level and/or containing combustible materi-
als, smoke detectors shall be provided. 

21.  At what height between the 

i.  For suspended ceilings which contain combustible materials, 

suspended ceiling and the 
ceiling level a sprinkler to be 
provided?  

sprinkler heads shall be provided. 

22.   Can alarm notification speak-
ers be used as mass notifica-
tion speakers?  

i.  Speakers used as alarm notification appliances on fire alarm 
systems shall also be permitted to be used for mass notifica-
tion systems.  

23.   What do you mean by a “fire 

pump set”?  

i.  The fire pump set for any water based suppression system 
including fire hydrants shall consists each of the following: 

Standby Diesel driven Pump  
Electric Jockey Pump  

  Main Electric Pump 
 
 
  Pump controllers 
  Ancillary valves and fittings 

24.   What is the temperature and 
fire rating of smoke exhaust 
or extract fans? 

25. What is the minimum distance 

between air intakes and any 
exhaust discharge openings?  

i.  Smoke Exhaust or extract fans shall be capable of operating 

effectively at 400°C for 2 hours. 

i.  Openings for the intakes of outdoor air to all air handling sys-
tems, mechanical ventilation systems, pressurization systems 
of exit staircases and internal corridors, and smoke control 
systems shall be no less than 5m from any exhaust discharge 
openings.  

26.  What is the type of approved 

i. 

material to be used for the 
construction of ceiling plenum 
to be used for smoke extract?  

 Materials used in the construction of a ceiling plenum shall 
be noncombustible or shall be limited combustible having a 
flame spread index of not more than 25 and a maximum 
smoke developed index of 50. 

 
 
 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 12814. FIRE AND LIFE SAFETY SYSTEMS 

 

Table A.2.4: FAQ– Fire and Life Safety Systems 

QUESTION 

ANSWER 

27.  What is the mode of ventilation 

i.  Every escape staircase serving buildings of 23 m in height 

for exit staircases in highrise 
buildings (23m or more in 
height)?  

or more must be made a smoke proof enclosure. The 
means of achieving a smoke proof enclosure should be by 
pressurization.  

28.  What is the required mode of 

i.  Staircase ventilation for non-highrise buildings shall be 

ventilation for non-high rise 
buildings?  

provided with natural, mechanical ventilation or by provid-
ing smoke proof enclosures.  

29. In what situation does staircases 
serving the basement level need 
to be pressurized? 

i.  All fire exit staircases that serve the basement floors shall 
also be pressurized if the same staircase shafts serving the 
upper floors are pressurized. Fire exit staircases that only 
serve the basement which have more than 2 levels or more 
than 7m below the level of discharge (high depth under-
ground buildings and structures) shall be pressurized. 

ii.  Fire exit staircases that only serve the basement which 

have less than 2 or levels or less than 7m below the level of 
discharge (low depth underground buildings and struc-
tures) shall not be required pressurization.  

30. What is the minimum rate of me-

i.  Mechanically ventilated internal corridor shall have a purg-

chanical ventilation for internal 
corridors ? 

ing rate of at least 6 air changes per hour.  

31.  What is the minimum rate of me-

i.  The purge rate for basement shall be at least 9 air changes 

chanical ventilation for base-
ments? 

per hour.  

32. What is the percentage of open-
ing required for natural ventila-
tion and the distance from the 
internal corridor?  

i.  Naturally ventilated internal corridor shall be by fixed ven-

tilation openings in an external wall and such ventilation 
openings being not less than 15 % of the floor area of the 
internal corridor.  

ii.  Natural ventilation opening shall not be more than 9 m 

from any part of the internal corridor. 

 

 
 
 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1282ANNEXURE 2 
DRAWING SUBMISSION 
REQUIREMENTS 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1283 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.1.  Intention 

 
A2.1.1.   The drawing submission requirements in this annexure are to address the follow-

ing. 

 

A2.1.1.1.  To standardize the drawings submitted to Civil Defence for approval.  

 

A2.1.1.2.  To standardize the drawing format, colour coding and the information 

that should be conveyed to Civil Defence engineers for their review and 
approval.  

 
A2.1.1.3.  To achieve code complaint project submission and approval process in 

timely manner.  

 

A2.2.  General requirements 

 
A2.2.1.   The general requirements for drawing submission to Civil Defence shall be in ac-

cordance with Table A2.1. General Requirements. 

 
A2.2.2.   The general requirements of Table A2.1. General Requirements shall apply to 

Consultants, Contractors, Décor companies, LPG contractors, House of expertise 
and event management companies, applying online for Civil Defence approval. 

Table A2.1: DRAWING SUBMISSION-General Requirements 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. FILE FORMAT AND 

i.  Soft copy file format shall be as required by the Civil Defence engineering 

SIZE 

departments of individual Emirates. Generally pdf., dwf. formats are ac-
cepted for online approval process.  

ii.  Each file can be a maximum of 50Mb and the total maximum size of en-

tire attachments for a project shall not exceed 200 Mb. However all these 
file format and size specifications shall be in accordance with portal ad-
ministration guidelines and procedures of individual departments. 

iii. Where an individual file size exceed 50 Mb, file can be split into parts as 

Part 1, Part 2, Part 3 etc. 

iv. .Zip files, files with errors and password protected files shall not be sub-

mitted. 

2. NUMBER OF FILES  

i.  Each project shall have total of 4 to 6 separate files, as required by the 

nature of project, as below. 
a.  Architecture and Life Safety. 
b.  Fire Detection and Alarm System. 
c.  Fire Protection and suppression systems. 
d.  Emergency Lighting and Signage systems. 
e.  Smoke Control and management systems. 
f.  LPG System (if applicable) 

ii.  In addition to above mentioned files, additional letters such as material 
letters, scope of work, electrical appliance usage etc. maybe required if 
applicable, as required by TabLe A2.1. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1284 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.2.  General requirements 

Table A2.1: DRAWING SUBMISSION-General Requirements 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

3. FILE NAMES 

i.  Files required by Table  A2.1.2.i. shall be named as below. 

a.  XXXXX (Application number)_LIFE SAFETY. 
b.  XXXXX (Application number)_FIRE ALARM SYSTEM. 
c.  XXXXX (Application number)_FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEM. 
d.  XXXX (Application number)_EMERGENCY LIGHTING SYSTEM. 
e.  XXXXX (Application number)_SMOKE CONTROL SYSTEM 
f.  XXXXX (Application number)_LPG SYSTEM. 

ii.  Files required by Table  A2.1.2.ii. shall be named as below. 

a.  MATERIAL AND ACTIVITY LETTER. 
b.  SCOPE OF WORK 
c.  LPG NOT REQUIRED 
d.  UNDERTAKING (Fore any client undertakings ) 

iii. File names such as below shall not be acceptable and drawings will not be 

reviewed. 
a.  Fire 
b.  Civil Defence 
c.  Residential 
d.  Project 
e.  Untitled 
f.  FF 
g.  Approval 
h.  2December 
i.  Tiltlepage 
j.  Groundfloor 

4. DO NOT SUBMIT THE-

SE DRAWINGS 

i.  Civil Defence does not review or evaluate any aspect of a project other 
than fire and life safety. The following drawings shall not be included in 
the submissions. 
a.  HVAC 
b.  Drainage. 
b.    Lighting. 
c.    Plumbing. 
d.    Structural Details 
e.    Floor tiling 
f.  Ceiling tiles 
g.  Electrical distribution 
h.  Landscaping 

ii.  Product details with brand names, product catalogues and product brand 
specifications, product catalogues shall not be attached as part of submis-
sions. Such submissions will not be reviewed and stamped. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1285 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.2.  General requirements 

Table A2.1: DRAWING SUBMISSION-General Requirements 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

5. REASONS FOR                     
REJECTION OF                     
APPLICATIONS 

i.  Drawings submitted to Civil Defence will be rejected without review, 

comments or suggestions if  any of the following is true. 
a.  Without required number of files 
b.  Without appropriate file names as per this chapter 
c.  Without scale 
d.  Without check marking (On e-engineering/online submissions) 
e.  Without coverpage 
f.  Without room names, occupancy names 
g.  Without colour coding and format in accordance with this chapter 
h.  Without material/activity/storage method letter for Storage and in-

dustrial projects 

i.  Without clarifying letter of LPG/Natural gas usage. 
j.  Without highlighting exact scope of work in modification/

adjustment/refurbishment jobs with yellow cloud for as approved 
and red cloud for as revised. 

k.  Submissions with product catalogues, product brochures, company 

and product licenses. 

 

ii.  Architecture/Life safety drawings submitted to Civil Defence will be re-

jected without review, comments or suggestions if  any of the following is 
true. 
a.  Without fire access road layouts. 
b.  Without sections with dimensions. 
c.  Without all floor plans 
d.  Without 1/3 of building diagonal distance between stairs in sprin-

klered buildings. 

e.  Without 1/2 of building diagonal distance between stairs in non-

sprinklered buildings. 

f.  Without separation at discharge level stair between typical floor dis-

charge and lower level or basement discharges. 

g.  Without direct discharge through protected corridor for half the 

number of building  stairs. 

h.  Without stair details, step details in dedicated page as per this chap-

ter. 

i.  Without fire lift in dedicated shaft for highrise buildings. 
j.  Without fire lift lobby for Superhighrise building. 
k.  Without generator room in highrise and Superhighrise buildings. 
l.  Without pump room and water tank locations, sections and details. 
m.  With underground pump room having hatch entry, cat ladder and 

spiral stair access. 

n.  Without required fire rating of corridors, stairs, LV room, substations, 

generator rooms, plant rooms, hazardous storage rooms, pump 
rooms etc. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1286 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.2.  General requirements 

Table A2.1: DRAWING SUBMISSION-General Requirements 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

5. REASONS FOR                     
REJECTION OF                     
APPLICATIONS 

iii.  Fire Detection and Alarm drawings submitted to Civil Defence will be 

rejected without review, comments or suggestions if  any of the following 
is true. 
a.  Fire Detection and alarm drawings superimposed on life safety de-

tails. 

b.  Without legend 
c.  Without wiring distribution. 
d.  Without all floor plans 
e.  Without sounder based detectors at bedrooms. 
f.  Without above false ceiling detectors with remote response indica-

tors. 

g.  Without sounders/speakers having flashers at parking, basements, 

plant rooms and outdoor areas. 

h.  Without control panel (FACP/FARP) locations. 
i.  Without riser diagrams. 
j.  Without voice speakers for highrise and Superhighrise buildings. 
 

iv.  Emergency Lighting drawings submitted to Civil Defence will be rejected 
without review, comments or suggestions if  any of the following is true. 
a.  Emergency lighting drawings superimposed on life safety details. 
b.  Without legend 
c.  Without wiring distribution. 
d.  Without all floor plans 
e.  Without cross zoning for central battery systems. 
f.  Without control panel locations. 
g.  Without riser diagrams. 
 

v.  Fire protection and Suppression drawings submitted to Civil Defence will 

be rejected without review, comments or suggestions if  any of the fol-
lowing is true. 
a.  Fire protection drawings superimposed on life safety details. 
b.  Without legend  and sprinkler types 
c.  Without piping distribution. 
d.  Without all floor plans 
e.  Without pipe sizes. 
f.  Without Fire pump and water tank capacities on riser diagrams. 
g.  Without riser diagrams. 
h.  Without vertical turbine type pumps for negative suction water tank 

arrangements. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1287 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.2.  General requirements 

Table A2.1: DRAWING SUBMISSION-General Requirements 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

5. REASONS FOR                     
REJECTION OF                     
APPLICATIONS 

vi.  Smoke control/ Management drawings submitted to Civil Defence will 
be rejected without review, comments or suggestions if  any of the fol-
lowing is true. 
a.  With HVAC drawings or details. 
b.  Smoke control drawings superimposed on life safety details. 
c.  Without legend 
d.  Without ducting distribution. 
e.  Without all floor plans 
f.  Without arrow marks for supply and return indications. 
g.  Without control panel locations. 
h.  Without riser diagrams. 
i.  Without typical details and specifications for fans, ducts and curtains, 

if any. 

 

vii.  LPG/ Natural gas drawings submitted to Civil Defence will be rejected 

without review, comments or suggestions if  any of the following is true. 
a.  LPG drawings superimposed on life safety details. 
b.  Without legend 
c.  Without piping distribution. 
d.  LPG piping crossing through stairs, lift lobbies, garbage rooms. 
e.  Without tank locations, sizes, capacity and separation dimensions. 
f.  Without fill line location. 
g.  Without PRDP location. 
h.  Without all floor plans 
i.  Without typical tank installation details. 
j.  Without gas detectors and control panel locations. 
k.  Without riser diagrams. 

6. LEGENDS ON THE 

i.  Drawings submitted to Civil Defence shall essentially have the symbols 

DRAWINGS 

and legend as required below. 
a.    LIFE SAFETY drawings shall have symbols and legend as per                        

Figure A2.1.1. 

b.    FIRE ALARM SYSTEM drawings shall have symbols and legend as per            

Figure A2.1.2. 

c.    FIRE PROTECTION drawings shall have symbols and legend as per             

Figure A2.1.3. 

d.    EMERGENCY LIGHTING drawings shall have symbols and legend as 

per Figure A2.1.4. 

e.    SMOKE CONTROL drawings shall have symbols and legend as per                    

Figure A2.1.5. 

f.    LPG SYSTEM drawings shall have symbols and legend as per                             

 

Figure A2.1.6. 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1288 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.2.  General requirements 

 

 
 
 

Figure A2.1.1.: LIFE SAFETY—Legends 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1289 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.2.  General requirements 

 

 
 
 

Figure A2.1.2.: FIRE ALARM SYSTEM—Legends 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1290 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.2.  General requirements 

 

 
 
 

Figure A2.1.2.: FIRE ALARM SYSTEM (VOICE EVACUATION SYSTEM)—Legends 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1291 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.2.  General requirements 

 
 
 
 

Figure A2.1.3.: FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEM—Legends 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1292 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.2.  General requirements 

 

 
 
 

Figure A2.1.3.: FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEM—Legends 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1293 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.2.  General requirements 

 

 
 
 

Figure A2.1.4.: EMERGENCY LIGHTING—Legends 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1294 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.2.  General requirements 

 

 
 
 

Figure A2.1.5.: SMOKE CONTROL SYSTEM—Legends 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1295 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.2.  General requirements 

 

 
 
 

Figure A2.1.6.: LPG SYSTEMS—Legends 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1296 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.3.  Consultant’s submissions 

 
A2.3.1.   Consultant’s drawings shall comply with the general requirements of Section 

A.2.2. and Table A.2.2. 

Table A2.2: Consultant’s Drawing Submissions 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. LIFE SAFETY               

i.  Consultant’s life safety drawing file shall consist of the following draw-

DRAWINGS 

ings. 
a.  Cover page—1 page. 
b.  Setting out plan—1 page 
c.  Fire access road—1 page 
d.  Floor plans—1 page for each floor 
e.  Sections—2 pages 
f.  Stair details—1 page 
g.  Curtainwall, Cladding, Roofing—1 page 
h.  Door schedule—1 page 

ii.  All the above pages shall be combined as one file. 

2. COLOR SCHEME FOR 

i.  Color scheme for life safety drawings shall be as per life safety legend of 

LIFE SAFETY               
DRAWINGS 

Figure A.2.1. and below. 
a.  Fire access road shall be PINK. 
b.  Stairs shall be GREEN. 
c.  Corridors, exit passageways, exit accessway shall be LIGHT GREEN   
d.  2 hour rated walls shall be RED. 
e.  1 hour rated walls shall be BLUE 
f.  90 minutes fire door shall be RED, as per Figure A2.1.  
g.  60 minutes fire door shall be BLUE, as per Figure A2.1.  
 

ii.  Travel distance shall be mentioned as per  Figure A2.1.  
iii.  Diagonal distance shall be mentioned as per  Figure A2.1.  
iv.  Separation distance between stairs shall be shown as per  Figure A2.1.  
v.  Dead end distances shall be mentioned as per Figure A2.1.  
vi. Room names/ occupancy usage  shall be mentioned in each room. 
vii. Show occupant load factors and occupant load on each floor. 
viii. Show Stair details. See Figure Figure A2.2.c.  
ix. Show pump room details. See Figure Figure A2.2.c.  
x. See Figure A2.2.a. and Figure A2.2.b. for more details. 

 

 
 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1297 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.3.  Consultant’s submissions 

 
A2.3.1.   Consultant’s drawings shall comply with the general requirements of Section A2.2. 

and Table A2.2. 

 

 
 
 

Figure A2.2.a.: LIFE SAFETY DRAWING COLOR SCHEMES 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1298 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.3.  Consultant’s submissions 

 
A2.3.1.   Consultant’s drawings shall comply with the general requirements of Section A2.2. 

and Table A2.2. 

 
 
 

 

 

Figure A2.2.b.: LIFE SAFETY DRAWING COLOR 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1299 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.3.  Consultant’s submissions 

 
A2.3.1.   Consultant’s drawings shall comply with the general requirements of Section A2.2. 

and Table A2.2. 

Figure A2.2.b.: LIFE SAFETY DRAWING COLOR SCHEMES 

 
 
 
 

Figure A2.2.c.: LIFE SAFETY TYPICAL DETAILS 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1300 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.3.  Consultant’s submissions 

 
A2.3.1.   Consultant’s drawings shall comply with the general requirements of Section A2.2. 

and Table A2.2. 

Table A2.2: Consultant’s Drawing Submissions 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

3. FIRE DETECTION AND 
ALARM SYSTEM AND 
VOICE EVACUATION 
SYSTEM  

i.  Consultant’s fire alarm system drawing file shall consist of the following 

drawings. 
a.  Floor plans showing  fire detectors, manual call points, Voice speakers, 
Emergency lighting units, interfacing units, FACP locations—1 page for 
each floor. 

b.  Riser diagram for Fire detection and alarm system—1 page 
c.  Riser diagram for Emergency Lighting system—1 page 
d.  Riser diagram for Voice Evacuation system—1 page 
e.  Legend shall be shown on each page 

ii.  All the above pages shall be combined as one file. 

4. COLOR SCHEME FOR 

FIRE DETECTION 
AND ALARM SYS-
TEM AND VOICE 
EVACUATION SYS-
TEM  

i.  Color scheme for Fire detection and alarm system drawings shall be as 
per life safety legend of Figure A2.2., Emergency lighting legend as per 
Figure A2.3. and below. 
a.  Fire detectors shall be RED. 
b.  Fire detection and alarm wiring in RED. 
c.  Voice speakers and wiring shall be in CRIMSON   
d.  Emergency lighting units and wiring shall be in GREEN. 
 

ii. See Figure A2.2.c. and A2.2.d. for more details. 

 

 
 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1301 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.3.  Consultant’s submissions 

 
A2.3.1.   Consultant’s drawings shall comply with the general requirements of Section A2.2. 

and Table A2.2. 

 

 

Figure A2.2.c.: FIRE DETECTION, VOICE ALARM AND EMERGENCY LIGHTING COLOR SCHEMES 

 
 

Figure A2.2.d.: LIFE SAFETY DRAWING COLOR SCHEMES 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1302 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.3.  Consultant’s submissions 

 
A2.3.1.   Consultant’s drawings shall comply with the general requirements of Section A2.2. 

and Table A2.2. 

Table A2.2: Consultant’s Drawing Submissions 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

5. FIRE PROTECTION 

i.  Consultant’s fire protection and suppression system drawing file shall 

AND SUPPRESSION 
SYSTEM 

consist of the following drawings. 
a.  Floor plans showing  sprinkler heads, fire hose cabinets and con-

necting piping, major valves such as ACV, Zone control valve—1 page 
for each floor. 

b.  Gas suppression system layout with Containers location, piping distri-

bution and nozzles. 

c.  Foam suppression system layout with storage tank location, piping 

distribution and nozzles. 

d.  Design criteria tables for Sprinklers, Gas suppression systems and 

foam suppression systems. 

e.  Pre-action system layout with piping and nozzle heads 
f.  Pipe sizes on each piping distribution 
g.  Pump room location and details—1 page or next to its floor plan 
h.  Riser diagram for Sprinklers, hose cabinets with pump and water tank 

capacities—1 page 

i.  Legend shall be shown on each page 
j.  Breeching inlet connection locations. 
k.  Typical installation details of every equipment in the proposal—1 page 

ii.  All the above pages shall be combined as one file. 

6. COLOR SCHEME FOR 

i.  Color scheme for Fire protection system drawings shall be as per life safe-

FIRE PROTECTION 
AND SUPPRESSION 
SYSTEM 

ty legend of Figure A2.3. and below. 
a.  Sprinklers, nozzles, FHC , Valves shall be RED. 
b.  Hose Piping shall be BLUE. 
c.  Sprinkler piping, gas suppression piping, foam system piping etc in 

GREEN. 

d.  Fire extinguishers shall be RED. 
 

ii. See Figure A2.2.e. , Figure A2.2.f. and A2.2.g. for more details. 

 

 
 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1303 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.3.  Consultant’s submissions 

 
A2.3.1.   Consultant’s drawings shall comply with the general requirements of Section A2.2. 

and Table A2.2. 

 

 
 

 

Figure A2.2.e.: FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEM COLOR SCHEMES 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1304 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.3.  Consultant’s submissions 

 
A2.3.1.   Consultant’s drawings shall comply with the general requirements of Section A2.2. 

and Table A2.2. 

 

 
 
 

Figure A2.2.e.: FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEM COLOR SCHEMES 

Figure A2.2.f.: TYPICAL FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEM INSTALLATION 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1305 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.3.  Consultant’s submissions 

 
A2.3.1.   Consultant’s drawings shall comply with the general requirements of Section A2.2. 

and Table A2.2. 

 

 
 
 

Figure A2.2.g.: FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEM  RISER DIAGRAM 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1306 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.3.  Consultant’s submissions 

 
A2.3.1.   Consultant’s drawings shall comply with the general requirements of Section A2.2. 

and Table A2.2. 

Table A2.2: Consultant’s Drawing Submissions 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

7. SMOKE CONTROL  

i.  Consultant’s Smoke control and smoke management system drawing file 

AND SMOKE                 
MANAGEMENT            
SYSTEM 

shall consist of the following drawings. 
a.  Floor plans showing  extraction ducts, ducts for fresh air make-up, 

pressurization ducts, corridor smoke control ducts, extraction points, 
supply points—1 page for each floor. 

b.  Where natural ventilation is applicable, clear sections shall show wall 

openings and the opening calculation table shall be shown. 

c.  Duct fire rating, sizes shall be shown. 
d.  Design criteria table shall be shown. 
e.  Extraction fan specifications and location shall be shown. 
f.  Riser diagram for system with ducting and principle for each floor—1 

page 

g.  Legend shall be shown on each page 
h.  Typical installation details of every equipment in the proposal—1 page 

ii.  All the above pages shall be combined as one file. 

8. COLOR SCHEME FOR 
SMOKE CONTROL  
AND SMOKE                 
MANAGEMENT            
SYSTEM 

i.  Color scheme for smoke control and smoke management system draw-

ings shall be as per life safety legend of Figure A2.5. and below. 
a.  Supply ducting shall be RED. 
b.  Extraction ducting shall be CRIMSON. 
 

ii. See Figure A2.2.h. and  Figure A2.2.i. for more details. 

 

 
 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1307 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.3.  Consultant’s submissions 

 
A2.3.1.   Consultant’s drawings shall comply with the general requirements of Section 

A.2.2. and Table A.2.2. 

 

 
 
 

 

Figure A2.2.h.: SMOKE CONTROL SYSTEM COLOR SCHEMES 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1308 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.3.  Consultant’s submissions 

 
A2.3.1.   Consultant’s drawings shall comply with the general requirements of Section 

A.2.2. and Table A.2.2. 

 

 

 
 

Figure A2.2.i.: SMOKE CONTROL SYSTEM RISER AND TYPICAL DETAILS 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1309 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.3.  Consultant’s submissions 

 
A2.3.1.   Consultant’s drawings shall comply with the general requirements of Section A2.2. 

and Table A2.2. 

Table A2.2: Consultant’s Drawing Submissions 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

9. LPG/NATURAL GAS 

i.  Consultant’s LPG/Natural gas system drawing file shall consist of the fol-

lowing drawings. 
a.  Floor plans showing  LPG/Natural gas piping distribution, control 

valves, supply points, gas detectors, emergency switches, control pan-
el location, filling point location, PRDP location —1 page for each floor. 

b.  Location and installation details of tanks with clear tank dimensions, 

separation distances from buildings, roof edges, structures and shafts.-
1 page  

c.  Pipe type and sizes shall be shown. 
d.  Shaft fire rating shall be shown. 
e.  Riser diagram for system with piping distribution for each floor—1 

page 

f.  Legend shall be shown on each page 
g.  Typical installation details of every equipment in the proposal, includ-
ing piping through shafts, containment arrangement, detector installa-
tion, control panel installation, PRDP details with dimensions —1 page 

ii.  All the above pages shall be combined as one file. 

i.  Color scheme for smoke control and smoke management system draw-

ings shall be as per life safety legend of Figure A2.6. and below. 
a.  Gas piping distribution shall be CRIMSON. 
b.  Gas tanks shall be CRIMSON. 
c.  Shafts and containment piping shall be RED. 
 

ii. See Figure A2.2.j. and A2.2.k. for more details. 

SYSTEM 

8. COLOR SCHEME FOR 
LPG/NATURAL GAS 
SYSTEM 

 

 
 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1310 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.3.  Consultant’s submissions 

 
A2.3.1.   Consultant’s drawings shall comply with the general requirements of Section A2.2. 

and Table A2.2. 

 

 
 

 

Figure A2.2.j.: LPG/ NATURAL GAS SYSTEM COLOR SCHEMES 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1311 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.3.  Consultant’s submissions 

 
A2.3.1.   Consultant’s drawings shall comply with the general requirements of Section A2.2. 

and Table A2.2. 

 

 

 
 

Figure A2.2.k.: LPG/ NATURAL GAS SYSTEM TYPICAL INSTALLATION DETAILS 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1312 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.4.  Décor/ Fit out submissions 

 
A2.4.1.  Décor/Fitout drawings shall comply with the general requirements of Section A2.2. 

and Table A2.3. 

Table A2.3: Décor / Fitout Drawing Submissions 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. LIFE SAFETY               

i.  Decor life safety drawing file shall consist of the following drawings. 

DRAWINGS 

a.  Cover page—1 page. 
b.  Setting out plan/ Floor plan with scope of work highlighted—1 page 
c.  Floor plans with furniture layouts—1 page for each floor 
d.  Sections, above false ceiling details—1 pages 
e.  Stair details—1 page 
f.  Door schedule—1 page 

ii.  All the above pages shall be combined as one file. 

2. COLOR SCHEME FOR 

i.  Color scheme for life safety drawings shall be as per life safety legend of 

LIFE SAFETY               
DRAWINGS 

Figure A2.1. and Table A2.2.2. 

ii. See Figure A2.3.a. and Figure A2.3.b. for more details. 

 

 
 
 

Figure A2.3.a.: DÉCOR / FIT OUT DRAWING REQUIREMENTS 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1313 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.4.  Décor/ Fit out submissions 

 
A2.4.1.  Décor/Fitout drawings shall comply with the general requirements of Section A2.2. 

and Table A2.3. 

 

 
 
 

Figure A2.3.b.: DÉCOR TRAVEL DISTANCES AND FURNITURE LAYOUTS 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1314 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.4.  Décor/ Fit out submissions 

 
A2.4.1.  Décor/Fitout drawings shall comply with the general requirements of Section A2.2. 

and Table A2.3. 

Table A2.3: Décor / Fitout Drawing Submissions 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

3. FIRE DETECTION AND 
ALARM SYSTEM AND 
VOICE EVACUATION 
SYSTEM  

i.  Decor fire alarm system drawing file shall consist of the following draw-

ings. 
a.  Floor plans showing  fire detectors, manual call points, Voice speakers, 
Emergency lighting units, interfacing units, FACP locations—1 page for 
each floor. 

b.  Riser diagram for Fire detection and alarm system—1 page 
c.  Riser diagram for Emergency Lighting system—1 page 
d.  Riser diagram for Voice Evacuation system—1 page 
e.  Legend shall be shown on each page 

ii.  All the above pages shall be combined as one file. 

4. COLOR SCHEME FOR 

FIRE DETECTION 
AND ALARM SYS-
TEM AND VOICE 
EVACUATION SYS-
TEM  

i.  Color scheme for Fire detection and alarm system drawings shall be as 
per life safety legend of Figure A2.2., Emergency lighting legend as per 
Figure A2.3. and below. 
a.  Fire detectors shall be RED. 
b.  Fire detection and alarm wiring in RED. 
c.  Voice speakers and wiring shall be in CRIMSON   
d.  Emergency lighting units and wiring shall be in GREEN. 
 

ii. See Figure A2.3.c.  for more details. 

 

 
 
 

 

Figure A2.3.c.: DÉCOR / FIT OUT DRAWING REQUIREMENTS 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1315 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.4.  Décor/ Fit out submissions 

 
A2.4.1.  Décor/Fitout drawings shall comply with the general requirements of Section A2.2. 

and Table A2.3. 

Table A2.3: Décor / Fitout Drawing Submissions 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

5. FIRE PROTECTION 

i.  Decor fire protection and suppression system drawing file shall consist of 

AND SUPPRESSION 
SYSTEM 

the following drawings. 
a.  Floor plans showing  sprinkler heads, fire hose cabinets and connecting 

piping, major valves such as ACV, Zone control valve, fire extinguishers —
1 page for each floor. 

b.  Gas suppression system layout with Containers location, piping distribu-

tion and nozzles. 

c.  Foam suppression system layout with storage tank location, piping distri-

bution and nozzles. 

d.  Pipe sizes on each piping distribution 
e.  Riser diagram for Sprinklers, hose cabinets with pump and water tank 

capacities—1 page 

f.  Legend shall be shown on each page 

ii.  All the above pages shall be combined as one file. 

6. COLOR SCHEME 

i.  Color scheme for Fire protection system drawings shall be as per life safety 

FOR FIRE                
PROTECTION AND 
SUPPRESSION            
SYSTEM 

legend of Figure A2.3. and below. 
a.  Sprinklers, nozzles, FHC , Valves shall be RED. 
b.  Hose Piping shall be BLUE. 
c.  Sprinkler piping, gas suppression piping, foam system piping etc in 

GREEN. 

d.  Fire extinguishers shall be RED. 
ii. See Figure A2.3.e for more details. 

7. SMOKE CONTROL  

i.  Decor Smoke control and smoke management system drawing file shall 

AND SMOKE                 
MANAGEMENT            
SYSTEM 

consist of the following drawings. 
a.  Floor plans showing  extraction ducts, ducts for fresh air make-up, pres-
surization ducts, corridor smoke control ducts, extraction points, supply 
points—1 page for each floor. 

b.  Where natural ventilation is applicable, clear sections shall show wall 

openings and the opening calculation table shall be shown. 

c.  Legend shall be shown on each page 
d.  Typical installation details of every equipment in the proposal—1 page 

ii.  All the above pages shall be combined as one file. 

8. COLOR SCHEME 

i.  Color scheme for smoke control and smoke management system drawings 

FOR SMOKE CON-
TROL  AND 
SMOKE                 
MANAGEMENT            
SYSTEM 

 

 

shall be as per life safety legend of Figure A2.5. and below. 
a.  Supply ducting shall be RED. 
b.  Extraction ducting shall be CRIMSON. 
 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1316 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.4.  Décor/ Fit out submissions 

 
A2.4.1.  Décor/Fitout drawings shall comply with the general requirements of Section A2.2. 

and Table A2.3. 

 

 
 
 

 

Figure A2.3.c.: DÉCOR / FIT OUT DRAWING FIRE FIGHTING 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1317 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.4.  Décor/ Fit out submissions 

 
A2.4.1.  Décor/Fitout drawings shall comply with the general requirements of Section A2.2. 

and Table A2.3. 

 

 
 

A2.5.  LPG/ Natural gas submissions 

 
A2.5.1.  LPG/ Natural gas drawings shall comply with the general requirements of Section 

A2.2. and Table A2.3.9. and  Table A2.3.10. 

Table A2.3: Décor / Fitout Drawing Submissions 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

9. LPG/NATURAL GAS 

i.  Decor LPG/Natural gas system drawing file shall consist of the following 

SYSTEM 

drawings. 
a.  Floor plans showing  LPG/Natural gas piping distribution, control valves, 

supply points, gas detectors, emergency switches, control panel location, 
filling point location, PRDP location —1 page for each floor. 

b.  Location and installation details of tanks with clear tank dimensions, sep-

aration distances from buildings, roof edges, structures and shafts.-1 
page  

c.  Pipe type and sizes shall be shown. 
d.  Shaft fire rating shall be shown. 
e.  Riser diagram for system with piping distribution for each floor—1 page 
f.  Legend shall be shown on each page 
g.  Typical installation details of every equipment in the proposal, including 
piping through shafts, containment arrangement, detector installation, 
control panel installation, PRDP details with dimensions —1 page 

ii.  All the above pages shall be combined as one file. 

8. COLOR SCHEME 

i.  Color scheme for smoke control and smoke management system drawings 

FOR LPG/
NATURAL GAS 
SYSTEM 

shall be as per life safety legend of Figure A2.6. and below. 
a.  Gas piping distribution shall be CRIMSON. 
b.  Gas tanks shall be CRIMSON. 
c.  Shafts and containment piping shall be RED. 
 

ii. See Figure A2.2.j. and A2.2.k. for more details. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1318 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.6.  Modifications, Revisions and refurbishment submissions 

 
A2.6.1.  All modifications, refurbishments, revisions of already approved drawings shall 

comply with the general requirements of Section A2.2. and Table A2.4. 

Table A2.4: Modifications and Revision Drawing Submissions 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. SCOPE OF WORK 

i.  Modifications and revisions drawing file shall comply with all the submission 

requirements of Section A2.2. and consist of the following format and 
attachments. 
a.  As approved drawings showing approved floor plans, highlighted 

(Clouded) in YELLOW, the portions to be revised. 

b.  As proposed drawings showing revised floor plans, highlighted (Clouded) 

in RED, the portions revised. 

c.  Note shall be inserted next to such approved YELLOW clouding and re-

vised RED clouding, exact scope of work in the proposed revision. 

d.  A LETTER on consultants letter head, both in Arabic and English, declar-

ing the exact changes in scope with floorwise list.  

ii.  See Figure A2.4.a. and A2.4.b. for more details. 

 

 
 
 

Figure A2.4.a.: MODIFICATION/ REVISION OF ARCHITECTURE PLANS 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1319 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.6.  Modifications, Revisions and refurbishment submissions 

 
A2.6.1.  All modifications, refurbishments, revisions of already approved drawings shall 

comply with the general requirements of Section A2.2. and Table A2.4. 

 

 
 

 

Figure A2.4.b.: MODIFICATION/ REVISION OF FIRE FIGHTING 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1320 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.7.  Infrastructure submissions 

 
A2.7.1.   Consultant’s drawings shall comply with the general requirements of Section 

A.2.2. and Table A.2.5. 

Table A2.5.: Consultant’s Drawing Submissions 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. INFRASTRUCTURE 

i.  Consultant’s infrastructure drawing file shall consist of the following draw-

DRAWINGS 

ings. 
a.  Cover page—1 page. 
b.  Setting out plan with plot usage. The division of plots shall clearly convey 
the type of buildings, Nature of occupancies in colour coded format (For 
example, G+9 Buildings in one color group, G+4 in another colour etc)—1 
page 

c.  Fire access road—1 page 
d.  Details of fire access road dimensions,  detailed layout of road network in 

scale conveying clearly the road network, roundabouts, bridges/
underpasses with sections. —1 page for each sector/ phase/ plot. 

e.  Sections of roads showing trenches allotted to Hydrant, Fuel Gas, Fire de-

tection and alarm systems etc—2 pages 

f.  Master Hydrant network—1 page 
g.  Details of Hydrant network, with pipe sizes—1 page for each sector/ 

phase/ plot 

h.  Fire pump room location, pump and tank capacities—1 page 
i.  Riser diagram showing hydrant looped network, pump and tank capaci-

ties—1 page 

j.  LPG/ Fuel gas network—1 page 
k.  LPG/ Fuel gas tank location with capacities and specifications—1 page. 
l.  If, commercial villas are part of the proposal, Fire Detection and Alarm sys-

tem in each villa and the interfacing network with FACP, Repeater panel 
locations—1 page for each sector/ phase/ plot. 

m. Riser diagram showing Fire Detection and Alarm system network, —1 

page. 

ii.  Plot usage, Road network shall be combined as one file. 
iii.   Yard hydrant, fire fighting details shall be combined as one file. 

2. COLOR SCHEME 

i.  Color scheme for life safety drawings shall be as per life safety legend of Fig-

FOR  

     INFRASTRUCTURE 

DRAWINGS 

ure A.2.1. and below. 
a.  Fire access road shall be PINK. 
b.  Stairs shall be GREEN. 
c.  Corridors, exit passageways, exit accessway shall be LIGHT GREEN   
d.  2 hour rated walls shall be RED. 
e.  1 hour rated walls shall be BLUE 
f.  90 minutes fire door shall be RED, as per Figure A2.1.  
g.  60 minutes fire door shall be BLUE, as per Figure A2.1.  

ii. Show pump room details. See Figure Figure A2.2.c.  
iii. See Figure A2.5. and relevant sections of this chapter for Fire Detection and 
Alarm, Fire Fighting, and LPG Systems for more details. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1321 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.7.  Infrastructure submissions 

 

 

 
 

 

 

Figure A2.5.: INFRASTRUCTURE SUBMISSIONS 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1322 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.7.  Infrastructure submissions 

 

 

 
 

 

 

Figure A2.5.: INFRASTRUCTURE SUBMISSIONS 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1323 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.7.  Infrastructure submissions 

 

 

 

 
 

 

Figure A2.5.: INFRASTRUCTURE SUBMISSIONS 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1324 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.8.  Event proposal submissions 

 
A2.8.1.   Event organizers proposals and drawings shall comply with the Table A.2.6. for the 

event approval. 

 
 
 

 

Table A2.6.: Event Proposal Submissions 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. EVENT PROPOSAL 

i.  Event organizers shall prepare a NOC request letter stating the following.  

LETTER 

   a. Nature of the event and activities.   
   b. Location of the event    
   c. The date and duration of the event        
   d. Number of people attending the event              
   e. Involvement of cooking, cooking gas, flame shows, pyrotechnics, laser 

shows, flammable materials etc. 

2. EVENT PROPOSAL 
DRAWINGS AND 
LAYOUTS 

i. Event organizers shall prepare event proposal layouts and drawings on A2 size, 

COLOURED hardcopy as follows. See Figure A.2.6. 
a.  A satellite image, highlighting the location of the event-1 page. 
b.  Master plan showing the layout of the event, showing road approaches, 

fencing, gates, area etc. 1 page. 

c.  A detailed event layout plan—2 pages MAXIMUM, showing the following 
     c.1. Actual event area with dimensions. 
     c.2. Seating arrangements if any, with chairs and tables. 
     c.3. Grandstand arrangements if any, with isles and sections. 
     c.4. Number of exits, exit gates, exit doors with dimensions and exit signs. 
     c.5. Stage if any, with dimensions and elevations. 
     c.6. Locations of fire extinguishers. 
     c.7. Locations of food and beverages stands, kiosks and food trucks. 
     c.8. Locations of cooking arrangements, location of cooking gas, BBQ etc. 
     c.9. Locations of first aid kits. 
     c.10. Locations of portable power generators. 
     c.11. Locations of Police, Ambulance and Civil Defence vehicles. 
     c.12. Locations of ‘Assembly Points’. 
d.  Where the venue has fire fighting and fire detection systems available, 

same shall be shown –1 page 

3. ADDITIONAL   
DOCUMENTS 

i. Event proposals shall be attached with additional documents as follows. 
a.  For cooking gas usage, Civil Defence approval for LPG installations. 
b.  For flammable gas usage, Civil Defence approval for LPG/Flammable gas 

installations. 

c.  For tents and membrane structures event décor and installations, material 

test certificates for tent fabrics, membranes, etc. 

d.  For flame shows and pyrotechnics, equipment test certificates and opera-

tor qualifications and certifications. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1325 of 1348 

 

 

A2.8.2.   Event organizers shall comply with minimum requirements for the Fire and Life 

Safety as per Table A.2.7. for the event arrangements. 

A2.8.3.   Event organizers shall comply with their responsibility in accordance with latest 
edition of UAE Fire and Life Safety Code of Practice, Chapter 18. Section 2.21.  

Table A2.7.: Minimum Fire and Life Safety requirements for Events 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. NUMBER AND 
SIZE OF EXITS 

i.  Minimum width of each exit shall not be less than 1.5 m. 
ii.    There shall be minimum of 2 exits, REMOTELY LOCATED, if the total number 

of people in the event do not exceed 500. 

iii.   There shall be minimum of 3 exits, REMOTELY LOCATED, if the total number 

of people in the event is between 501 to 1000. 

iv.   There shall be minimum of 4 exits, REMOTELY LOCATED, if the total number 

of people in the event is between 1001 to 2000. 

v.    There shall be minimum of 6 exits, REMOTELY LOCATED ON OPPOSITE SIDES, 

if the total number of people in the event exceeds 2000. 

2. HANDRAILS AND 

i.  Guards shall be provided at the open sides of exitsways which exceeds 760 

GUARDS 

mm above the floor or grade below. 

ii.    Height of the guard shall be not less than 1065 mm from the base surface to 

3. ILLUMINATION 

the top of guard. 

iii.   Handrails shall be provided on both sides of Stairs, Spiral Stairs, Ramps, 

Bridges, steps etc. 

iv.   Handrails should be within 865 mm - 965 mm from the surface of the tread. 
 

i.  The entire event area shall be well illuminated during the entire duration. 
ii.  Continuous illumination shall be provided for exits, exitways, exit corridors, 

exit stairs, ramps, aisles, escalators, walkways leading to publicways. 

iii.   Minimum illumination shall be of of 1 ft-candle (10.8 lux) for floor and walk-

ing surfaces. 

iv.   Minimum illumination shall be of 10 ft-candle (108 lux) for stairs. 
v.    Photoluminescent markings shall be provided to exits and exitways. 

4. EMERGENCY 

LIGHTING 

i.  Emergency Lighting System shall be provided throughout the event area. 
ii.  Emergency Lighting shall be capable of functioning for not less than 3 hours 

in the event of failure of normal lighting. 

iii.  Emergency Lighting shall serve in case of Interruption of normal lighting, 

public utility and outside electrical power supply. 

iv.   Emergency Lighting shall provide initial illumination that is not less than an 
average of 10.8 lux and at any point not less than 1.1 lux, measured along 
the path of egress at floor level.  

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1326 of 1348 

Table A2.7.: Minimum Fire and Life Safety requirements for Events 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

5. EXIT SIGNAGE 

i.  Approved Exit Signs and directional signs with a directional indicator show-

ing the direction of Exit travel shall be installed throughout the area. 

ii.  Exit Signs shall be easily visible from any direction of exit access.  
iii.    Sign placement shall be within rated viewing distance of 30 m.  
iv.    No decorations, furnishings, or equipment that impairs the visibility of a 

sign shall be permitted.  

6. PORTABLE FIRE 
EXTINGUISHERS 

i.    Portable fire extinguishers in compliance to latest edition of UAE Fire and Life 

Safety Code of Practice, shall be provided along normal walking paths of ex-
itways and exits, near stages, cooking areas and at 30 m intervals. 

ii.    All the Portable Fire Extinguishers shall be fully charged and ready for use in 

case of an emergency. 

7. OTHER SAFETY 

REQUIREMENTS 

LPG systems shall not be installed without Civil Defence approval. 

i. 
ii.  Flame shows, pyrotechnics shall not be conducted at events without Civil 

Defence approval. 

iii.   Events shall not be held without Civil Defence approval and inspection. 
iv.    Events organizers shall request for inspection from Civil Defence prior to the 

event commencement. 

v.  Events organizers shall request for Standby fire trucks and Civil Defence per-
sonnel where it is required by the Civil Defence operations department. It is 
event orgainzers responsibility to verify with Civil Defence operations de-
partment. 

vi. Smoking and Shisha shall be permitted only at designated areas. 

8. EVENT                  

ORGANIZERS 
RESPNSIBILITY 

i.  Event organizers shall comply with their responsibility in accordance with 
latest edition of UAE Fire and Life Safety Cde of Practice, Chapter 18. Sec-
tion 2.21.  

 

 
 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1327 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.8.  Event proposal submissions 

 

 

 
 

 

Figure A2.6.: TYPICAL EVENT PROPOSAL SUBMISSION 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1328 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.8.  Event proposal submissions 

 

 

 

Figure A2.6.: TYPICAL EVENT PROPOSAL SUBMISSION 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1329 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.8.  Event proposal submissions 

 

 

 

Figure A2.6.: TYPICAL EVENT PROPOSAL SUBMISSION 

 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1330 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.9.  Façade, Cladding, Curtainwall and Roofing report submissions 

 
A2.9.1.   Façade, Cladding, cutainwall and roofing proposals and drawings shall comply with 

the  Table A.2.8.  

Table A2.8.: Cladding, Curtainwall and Roofing Proposal Submissions 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

1. AUTHORIZED         

i. 

APPLICANT 

Façade, Cladding, Curtainwall and Roofing submissions to Civil Defence shall 
only be submitted through Civil Defence approved House of Expertise OR the 
Main Consultant OR the Façade Consultant having qualified personnel as per 
Chapter 1, Section 4.4.7.5 and 4.4.8. 

ii.    It is House of Expertise or Main Consultant OR Façade Consultant’s responsi-

bility to understand the requirements of UAE Fire and Life Safety Code of 
Practice, material test requirements, Civil Defence registration of contractors 
and suppliers and the report submission format. 

2.  REPORT        

i. Report shall essentially follow the following format. 

FORMAT 

a.  All reports shall be in pdf format. 
b.  It is applicants responsibility to recreate soft copies of the sample formats 

shown in this table and adhere to submission format. 

c.  It is applicants responsibility to submit error free pdf files such that Civil De-

fence stamp as “water mark” can be inserted into the pdf files without 
glitch. 

d.  A cover page –1 page as per Format A2.9.1.: Cover page format and sam-

ple. 

e.  Under taking declarations from each involved party—1 page as per Table 

A.2.8.4. Stamped undertaking declarations., followed by their civil defence 
valid certificate and followed by CoC from certification body—5 pages MAX-
IMUM as shown in Sample A2.9.12. 

f.  An engineering evaluation and assessment—3 pages MAXIMUM as per for-
mat and Table shown in Format A2.9.13. Non-compliances shall be clearly 
conveyed in the assessment. 

g.  Sectional schematics –3 pages as shown in Format A2.9.14. Schematics shall 

depict exact design and site conditions, clearly labeling the components, 
dimensions and materials. 

h.  An inspection report—3 pages MAXIMUM as per format and Table shown in 

Format A2.9.15. 

3.  UN ACCEPTABLE 

i.  Reports not complying to Table A2.8. shall not be reviewed and shall not be 

REPORTS 

acceptable. 

ii.  Reports submitted by parties other than Civil Defence approved house of ex-

pertise shall not be acceptable.  

iii.  DO NOT submit product catalogues and brochures. 
iv.   DO NOT provide generalized technical description of how and why fire 

spreads. 

v.  DO NOT provide Test standard methods and details. 
vi.   DO NOT submit without stamps and signatures, where applicable as per for-

mat samples. 

vii.  DO NOT provide irrelevant and unnecessary attachments. 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1331 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.9.  Façade, Cladding, Curtainwall and Roofing proposal submissions 

Table A2.8.: Cladding, Curtainwall and Roofing Proposal Submissions 

ITEM 

REQUIREMENTS 

3.  UNACCEPTABLE 

viii. DO NOT submit reports for projects where suppliers are not registered with 

REPORTS 

Civil Defence. It is main consultants and contractors responsibility to get 
suppliers approach Civil Defence for their registration. 

ix.   Reports clearly and efficiently not highlighting non-compliances shall not be 

acceptable. 

x.    DO NOT SUBMIT REPORTS JUSTIFYING NON-COMPLIANT CLADDING AND 

ROOFING MATERIALS. 

i.   Every party involved in the project shall furnish undertaking declarations as 

follows. 
a.  House of Expertise OR Main consultant OR Façade Consultant—1 page as 
per Format Sample A2.9.2.: House of Expertise/ Main Consultant/Façade 
Consultant undertaking letter format and sample. 

b.  Main consultant—1 page as per Format Sample A2.9.3.: Main consultant 

undertaking letter format and sample. 

c.  Main contractor—1 page as per Format Sample A2.9.4.: Main contractor 

undertaking letter format and sample. 

d.  Panel supplier—1 page as per Format Sample A2.9.5.: ACP/MCM/SOLID 
METAL/PEWFS/ GRC panel Supplier undertaking letter format and sam-
ple. 

e.  EIFS/ETICS supplier—1 page as per Format Sample A2.9.6.: EIFS/ ETICS 

Supplier undertaking letter format and sample. 

f.  Natural stone supplier—1 page as per Format Sample A2.9.7.: Natural 

stone Supplier undertaking letter format and sample. 

g.  Firestopping system supplier—1 page as per Format Sample A2.9.8.: Fire-

stopping system Supplier undertaking letter format and sample. 

h.  Insulation material supplier—1 page as per Format Sample A2.9.9.: Insula-

tion material Supplier undertaking letter format and sample. 

i.  Roofing panel supplier—1 page as per Format Sample A2.9.10.: Roofing 

panel Supplier undertaking letter format and sample. 

j.  Glazing supplier—1 page as per Format Sample A2.9.11.: Roofing panel 

Supplier undertaking letter format and sample. 

4.  STAMPED          
UNDERTAKING 
DECLARATIONS 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1332 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.9.  Façade, Cladding, Curtainwall and Roofing proposal submissions 

 
 

 
 

 

 

Format A2.9.1.: Cover page format and sample 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1333 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.9.  Façade, Cladding, Curtainwall and Roofing proposal submissions 

 
 
 
 
 

Format Sample A2.9.2.: House of Expertise undertaking letter format and sample 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1334 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.9.  Façade, Cladding, Curtainwall and Roofing proposal submissions 

 

 

Format Sample A2.9.3.: Main Consultant undertaking letter format and sample 

 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1335 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.9.  Façade, Cladding, Curtainwall and Roofing proposal submissions 

 

 

Format Sample A2.9.4.: Contractor/ Fabricator undertaking letter format and sample 

 
 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1336 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.9.  Façade, Cladding, Curtainwall and Roofing proposal submissions 

 
 

 
 

 

Format A2.9.5.: ACP/MCM/SOLID METAL/PEWFS/ GRC panel Supplier undertaking letter format and sample 

 

| CDGH - OP - 25 |  September 20181337 Of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.9.  Façade, Cladding, Curtainwall and Roofing proposal submissions 

 
 
 
 
 

Format and Sample A2.9.6.: EIFS / ETICS Supplier undertaking letter format and sample 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1338 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.9.  Façade, Cladding, Curtainwall and Roofing proposal submissions 

 

 

 

 
 

Format and Sample A2.9.7.: Natural Stone Supplier undertaking letter format and sample 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1339 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.9.  Façade, Cladding, Curtainwall and Roofing proposal submissions 

 
 
 
 
 

Format and sample A2.9.8.: Firestopping system Supplier undertaking letter format and sample 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1340 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.9.  Façade, Cladding, Curtainwall and Roofing proposal submissions 

 

 
 
 
 

Format and sample A2.9.9.: Insulation material Supplier undertaking letter format and sample 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1341 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.9.  Façade, Cladding, Curtainwall and Roofing proposal submissions 

 
 
 
 
 

Format A2.9.10.: Roofing panel Supplier undertaking letter format and sample 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1342 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.9.  Façade, Cladding, Curtainwall and Roofing proposal submissions 

 
 
 
 
 

Format A2.9.11.: Glazing Supplier undertaking letter format and sample 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1343 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.9.  Façade, Cladding, Curtainwall and Roofing proposal submissions 

 
 
 
 
 

Format A2.9.12.: Civil Defence Certificate for illustration 

 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1344 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.9.  Façade, Cladding, Curtainwall and Roofing proposal submissions 

 

Format A2.9.13.: Technical Assessment 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1345 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.9.  Façade, Cladding, Curtainwall and Roofing proposal submissions 

 
 
 
 
 

 

Format A2.9.14.: Schematics (In colour) 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1346 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.9.  Façade, Cladding, Curtainwall and Roofing proposal submissions 

 
 
 
 
 

 

Format A2.9.14.: Schematics (In colour) 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1347 of 1348 

A2. Drawing Submission Requirements 

 

A2.9.  Façade, Cladding, Curtainwall and Roofing proposal submissions 

 

Format A2.9.15.: Inspection Report 

| CDGH-OP-25 |     September 2018Page 1348 of 1348